<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!-- TODO PAGE BREAKS FROM 333 -->

<!ENTITY gtilde CDATA "g" -- g with tilde -->
<!ENTITY Gtilde CDATA "G" -- G with tilde -->

]><TEI.2 lang=ceb>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>M&gtilde;a paquigpulong sa Iningles ug Binisaya</title>
<author key="Santiago, P. Gregorio de">P. Gregorio de Santiago (1865&ndash;1924)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name key="Hellingman, Jeroen">Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLW>#####</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>#####</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20100524224922desantiago</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID4bfcc1604505c</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>41540-Gregorio-de-Santiago-Mga-paquigpulong</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:c1c0f288-d676-4629-a9ec-5a3fc0e83193</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>41540</idno>
<date>2012-12-02</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="https://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

<p>Scans of this book are available from The Internet Archive (copy <xref url="https://archive.org/details/afu8653.0001.001.umich.edu">1</xref>, <xref url="https://archive.org/details/mgapaquigpulong00velagoog">2</xref>).

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">This 1905 book was primarily meant for use by Cebuano speakers to learn English &lsquo;by example.&rsquo; Given its &lsquo;no grammar&rsquo; approach, it works equally well (or not) the other way round. The book starts with thematic lists of words, followed by a number of translated sentences on various themes, short sample letters, and concludes with a pronunciation guide (of English).</note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>P. Gregorio de Santiago</author>
<title>M&gtilde;a paquigpulong sa Iningles ug Binisaya</title>
<date>1905</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
<p>

<!--

Regular expresssion to find translations (separated by minimal 4 spaces)

Find:       \n([a-z][^\n]+)(    )([a-z][^\n]+)
Replace:    \n<row><cell lang=en>\1\2<cell>\3

Start of table

Find:       \n\n<row><cell lang=en>
Replace:    \n\n<p><table rend="class(voc)">\n<row><cell lang=en>

End of table

Find:       <row><cell lang=en>([^\n]+)\n\n
Replace:    <row><cell lang=en>\1\n</table>\n\n

-->

</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=es>Spanish</language>
        <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>Bisayan languages -- Conversation and phrase books</item>
                <item>Bisayan languages -- Glossaries, vocabularies, etc.</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2012-10-20 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>


<pb>
<div1 id=transnote type=TranscriberNote>
<head>Transcriber&apos;s Note</head>

<p>Translation of the title in English: <hi>Expressions in English and Visayan</hi>.

<p>This 1905 book was primarily meant for use by Cebuano speakers to learn English by example. Given its &lsquo;no grammar&rsquo; approach, it works equally well (or not) the other way round. The book starts with thematic lists of words, followed by a number of translated sentences on various themes, short sample letters, and concludes with a pronunciation guide (of English).

<p>For modern users, two caveats apply: First, the spelling used is the old Spanish-derived orthography. This is fairly distinct from the modern orthography. The most conspicuous changes are: <hi>c</hi> is now written as either <hi>k</hi> or <hi>s</hi>, depending on the context; <hi>qui</hi> becomes <hi>ki</hi>, and <hi>gui</hi> becomes <hi>gi</hi>. The semivowel <hi>w</hi> is represented by <hi>o</hi> (For example, <hi>adlao</hi> for <hi>adlaw</hi> &lsquo;sun&rsquo;, or <hi>oala</hi> for <hi>wala</hi> &lsquo;not&rsquo;), and the semivowel <hi>y</hi> is not always written (for example, <hi>sia</hi> for <hi>siya</hi> &lsquo;he&rsquo;). The <hi>g</hi> with a tilde in the combination <hi>n&gtilde;</hi> is no longer used: modern Cebuano simply uses <hi>ng</hi> in that case. The preceding <hi>n</hi> is enough to indicate the correct pronunciation; when the <hi>g</hi> is to be pronounced, <hi>ngg</hi> is used. Second, the Cebuano used is sometimes rather formal, and does not reflect modern usage in many cases. Often, Spanish words have been abandoned in favor of English equivalents. Common contractions as used in speech have not been applied. Even a native Cebuano speaker might have trouble understanding some of the sentences, and will consider the language very &lsquo;deep&rsquo;.

<p>For English readers, a <ref target=engtoc>translation of the table of contents</ref> has been added.

<p>Some more up-to-date resources for learning Cebuano on the internet are available from <xref url="http://www.binisaya.com/cebuano">binisaya.com</xref>, <xref url="https://www.bohol.ph/wced.php">bohol.ph</xref>, and <xref url="http://translate.sandayong.com/translator/bisaya-english">sandayong.com</xref>.


<titlePage>
<docTitle><titlePart>M&Gtilde;A PAQUIGPULONG
<lb>SA
<lb>ININGLES UG BINISAYA</titlePart></docTitle>

<byline>GUINTUCOD
<lb>NI
<lb><docAuthor>P. Gregorio de Santiago</docAuthor>

<lb>O. S. A.
</byline>


<docImprint lang=es>Con licencia de los Superiores

<lb>MANILA: 1905
<lb>IMPRENTA DE SANTOS Y BERNAL
<lb>Echagüe 84, Sta. Cruz
</docImprint>
</titlePage>


<pb>
<div1 type=Copyright id=copyright>


<p rend="align(center) font-size(small)"><hi lang=es>En propiedad del autor.</hi>


<pb n=3 id=pb3>
<div1 id=pahamtngon type=Preface>
<head>PAHAMATN&Gtilde;ON</head>


<p>Ang pinasugdan niining libro n&gtilde;a guihalad co canimo, hinigugmang magbabasa, mao da lang ug pila ca pagpamulong n&gtilde;a binisaya n&gtilde;a guihubad co sa iningles cay aron musugod sa pagsulti niining pinolon&gtilde;an ang m&gtilde;a bata n&gtilde;a guitonan co niana; uala co gayud mahunahuna n&gtilde;a arang maquita ang sinulat co sa m&gtilde;a talahodon n&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a managagda canaco sa pagcahingpit sa acong buhat, sa pagcahimo ug usa ca libro n&gtilde;a tacus sa pagimprenta. Busa guipon-an ang guisugdan co sa lain laing m&gtilde;a pagpamulong, ug ania man in&gtilde;on sa pagcacabús sa acong quinaadman. Dili pacain&gtilde;on mo n&gtilde;a nagapaandac aco sa acong binuhat; hinsaydan man naco n&gtilde;a daghan caha ang m&gtilde;a sayop n&gtilde;a hipalgan mo sa pagbasa sa ubang m&gtilde;a pagpamulong; apan, maquilooy aco canimo n&gtilde;a pasagdan mo lang canang m&gtilde;a sayop, ug imong tanaon da ang tuyo co sa pagpanagana canimo sa dalan sa pagsulti sa iningles. Cay maculi man caayo ang pagsangpot sa ubang m&gtilde;a pulong niining pinolon&gtilde;an, cun dili quita ogaling mudan&gtilde;up sa quinachila, uala idugang co ang pagcaloas nila in&gtilde;on sa guipanagtuman sa m&gtilde;a magsusulat sa iningles. Maquita <pb n=4 id=pb4>mo usab ug m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a binisaya n&gtilde;a lain man caha sa cahologan sa hindunggan mo ug buut aco n&gtilde;a mahamatn&gtilde;on ca sa dacong calainan sa pagcasabut sa ubang m&gtilde;a pulong sa tagsa ca longsod sa cabisay-an. Sa catapusan,<!-- unclear comma? --> ipan&gtilde;amuyo co canimo, hinigugmang magbabasa<!-- unclear comma? --> n&gtilde;a ang quinaadman mo macapono unta sa pagcaculang niining basahon, ug cun macadan&gtilde;at aco n&gtilde;a himuslan sia sa ubang m&gtilde;a magbabasa igo man quining balos sa acong cabudlay.



<pb n=5 id=pb5>
<div1 id=alfabeto>
<head>ALFABETO <corr sic="ÑGA">N&Gtilde;A</corr> ININGLES</head>


<p>Ang m&gtilde;a letra sa pinolon&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a inglés ug ang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan sa tagsa tagsa mao ang musonod:


<p><table rend="align(center) columns(2)">
<row><cell rend="width(12%)">A <cell rend="width(12%)"><hi>a</hi>      <cell rend="width(12%)">    ei
<row><cell>B <cell><hi>b</hi>      <cell>    bi
<row><cell>C <cell><hi>c</hi>      <cell>    si
<row><cell>D <cell><hi>d</hi>      <cell>    di
<row><cell>E <cell><hi>e</hi>      <cell>     i
<row><cell>F <cell><hi>f</hi>      <cell>    ef
<row><cell>G <cell><hi>g</hi>      <cell>   dyi
<row><cell>H <cell><hi>h</hi>      <cell>   ich
<row><cell>I <cell><hi>i</hi>      <cell>    ai
<row><cell>J <cell><hi>j</hi>      <cell>   dye
<row><cell>K <cell><hi>k</hi>      <cell>   que
<row><cell>L <cell><hi>l</hi>      <cell>    el
<row><cell>M <cell><hi>m</hi>      <cell>    em
<row><cell>N <cell><hi>n</hi>      <cell>    en
<row><cell>O <cell><hi>o</hi>      <cell>     o
<row><cell>P <cell><hi>p</hi>      <cell>    pi
<row><cell>Q <cell><hi>q</hi>      <cell>  quiú
<row><cell>R <cell><hi>r</hi>      <cell>    ar
<row><cell>S <cell><hi>s</hi>      <cell>    es
<row><cell>T <cell><hi>t</hi>      <cell>    ti
<row><cell>U <cell><hi>u</hi>      <cell>    iu
<row><cell>V <cell><hi>v</hi>      <cell>    vi
<row><cell>W <cell><hi>w</hi>      <cell>dobliú
<row><cell>X <cell><hi>x</hi>      <cell>    ex
<row><cell>Y <cell><hi>y</hi>      <cell>   uay
<row><cell rend="width(12%)">Z <cell rend="width(12%)"><hi>z</hi>      <cell rend="width(12%)">   sed
</table>


<p>Quining m&gtilde;a letra guibahin man sa m&gtilde;a vocal ug sa m&gtilde;a consonante; nahatun&gtilde;ud sa nahaunang bahin ang m&gtilde;a letra <hi>a</hi>, <hi>e</hi>, <hi>i</hi>, <hi>o</hi>, ug <hi>u</hi>, ug usahay usab ang <hi>w</hi> ug ang <hi>y</hi> cun quining duha guisundan sa laing letra; sa icaduhang bahin nahatun&gtilde;ud ang uban. Dili man ang tuyo co ang pagsaysay sa nagcalain laing m&gtilde;a tin&gtilde;oga sa tagsa ca letra: quining tuyo pagatumanon sa gramática, n&gtilde;a may catungdanan sa pagtodlo sa m&gtilde;a agui sa pagsulti ug sa pagsulat ug maayo sa <pb n=6 id=pb6>iningles. Labot pa niini; ang alfabeto n&gtilde;a binisaya culan&gtilde;an sa ubang m&gtilde;a letra<note n=1>Sa pinolon&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a bisaya totolo da ang m&gtilde;a vocal: <hi>a</hi>, <hi>e</hi> cun <hi>i</hi> ug <hi>o</hi> cun <hi>u</hi>; apan sa iningles lilima man ug usahay n&gtilde;ani ang <hi>w</hi> ug ang <hi>y</hi>, ug ang tagsa canila aduna man ug m&gtilde;a tin&gtilde;ug n&gtilde;a caogalin&gtilde;on nila n&gtilde;a dili macasacot sa uban, in&gtilde;on sa m&gtilde;a regla n&gtilde;a dinaclit n&gtilde;a arang maquita sa magbabasa. Quinahanglan gayud n&gtilde;a ang tinonan dili macaala sa nagcalain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a tin&gtilde;ug sa pagsulti, ug n&gtilde;a dili usab ilisan nia ang m&gtilde;a letra sa pagsulat nia sa iningles, hinoo magabantay sia unta ug maayo sa paghatag sa tagsa ca letra sa tin&gtilde;ug cun sa pagcamao n&gtilde;a caogalin&gtilde;on niya.</note>, ug malisud man caayo ang pagpaquisabot sa pagsangpot sa uban n&gtilde;a iningles sa sinulat lamang. Busa ang mahagugma macatoon sa pagcaloas nila sa dacong pagcahingpit magaquinahanglan gayud sa usa ca magtotoon, n&gtilde;a canunay magapamati cania sa lain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a tin&gtilde;og nianang man&gtilde;a letra, ug sa in&gtilde;on niana ang tinonan macadaog sa hinay hinay sa m&gtilde;a cabilinggan n&gtilde;a hinpalgan sa n&gtilde;atanan n&gtilde;a buut magasulti ug maayo sa iningles. Tun&gtilde;ud niini ibutang co lang dinhi ang m&gtilde;a vocal da ug ang pagcaloas nila, uban sa pipila ca regla n&gtilde;a lactud, cay aron hibaloan sa magbabasa ang labing quinahanglanon.


<p>A

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Ang <hi>a</hi> guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>ei</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>fate</hi>, <hi>make</hi>, <hi>date</hi> ug sa uban pa main&gtilde;on niining m&gtilde;a sanglet.

<p>Fate <hi>feit</hi>, make <hi>meik</hi>, date <hi>deit</hi>, shake <hi>sheik</hi>, take <hi>teik</hi>, &amp;.

<pb n=7 id=pb7><row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>a</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>fat</hi>, <hi>mad</hi>, <hi>pad</hi>, <hi>hat</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Fat <hi>fat</hi>, mad <hi>mad</hi>, hat <hi>hat</hi>, cat <hi>cat</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>III. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>aa</hi>, cun sa usa ca <hi>a</hi> n&gtilde;a dugay dugayon, sa m&gtilde;a pulong main&gtilde;on niini n&gtilde;a sumunud: <hi>far</hi>, <hi>car</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Far <hi>faar</hi>, car <hi>caar</hi>, bar <hi>baar</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>IV. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>o</hi> sa m&gtilde;a sanglet <hi>fall</hi>, <hi>call</hi>, <hi>all</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Call <hi>col</hi>, fall <hi>fol</hi>, all <hi>ol</hi>, bald <hi>bold</hi>, walk<corr sic=","></corr> <hi>wok</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>V. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>ea</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>fare</hi>, <hi>care</hi>, <hi>dare</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Dare <hi>dear</hi>, care <hi>kear</hi>, fare <hi>fear</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<p>E

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>i</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>mete</hi>, <hi>scene</hi>, <hi>we</hi>, <hi>she</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Mete <hi>mit</hi>, scene <hi>sin</hi>, we <hi>ui</hi>, she <hi>shi</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>e</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong main&gtilde;on niini <hi>pet</hi>, <hi>men</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Pet <hi>pet</hi>, men <hi>men</hi>, met <hi>met</hi>, hen <hi>hen</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<p>I

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>ai</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>bite</hi>, <hi>pine</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Bite <hi>bait</hi>, pine <hi>pain</hi>, pike <hi>paik</hi>, shine <hi>shain</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>i</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>bit</hi>, <hi>pick</hi>, <hi>pin</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Bit <hi>bit</hi>, pin <hi>pin</hi>, pig <hi>pig</hi>, kiss <hi>kis</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<pb n=8 id=pb8><p>O

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>ou</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>note</hi>, <hi>rose</hi>, <hi>bone</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Note <hi>nout</hi>, rose <hi>rous</hi>, bone <hi>boun</hi>, stone <hi>stoun</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>u</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>do</hi>, <hi>lose</hi>, <hi>move</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Do <hi>du</hi>, lose <hi>lus</hi>, move <hi>muv</hi>, who <hi>hu</hi>, whom <hi>hum</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>III. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>o</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>not</hi>, <hi>hot</hi>, <hi>clock</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Not <hi>not</hi>, hot <hi>hot</hi>, clock <hi>clok</hi>, soft <hi>soft</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>IV. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>oo</hi> cun sa usa ca <hi>o</hi> n&gtilde;a ta-as ta-ason, sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>nor</hi>, <hi>for</hi>, <hi>lord</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Nor <hi>noor</hi>, for <hi>foor</hi>, lord <hi>loord</hi>, horn <hi>hoorn</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>V. <cell>Dunay usab ug laing pagcaloas sa <hi>o</hi> n&gtilde;a guihin&gtilde;anlan sa m&gtilde;a gramática <hi>eu</hi> francés<corr sic=".">,</corr> ug maculi matoon quining tin&gtilde;uga cun dili pamation ang pagcasangpot niana sa maong m&gtilde;a inglés cun americano. Canang tin&gtilde;ug matuman sa m&gtilde;a pulong main&gtilde;on niini <hi>done</hi>, <hi>gone</hi>, <hi>son</hi>, <hi>some</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<p>U

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>iu</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>tube</hi>, <hi>tune</hi>, <hi>music</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Tube <hi>tiub</hi>, acute <hi>akiut</hi>, stupid <hi>stiupid</hi>, pure <hi>piur</hi>, &amp;.

<pb n=9 id=pb9><row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>u</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>rude</hi>, <hi>rule</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Rude <hi>rud</hi>, rule <hi>rul</hi>, bull <hi>bul</hi>, pull <hi>pul</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>III. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>eu</hi> francesa sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>tub</hi>, <hi>tun</hi>, <hi>begun</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<p>Quining tin&gtilde;uha magsama man sa naasuy co sa regla V sa letra <hi>o</hi>.


<p>W

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>     <cell>Cun ang <hi>w</hi> ana-a sa sinugdan sa usa ca pulong main&gtilde;on niini <hi>wind</hi>, maoy consonante; apan cun guisundan sa laing letra maoy vocal ug guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>u</hi>.

<p>Sow <hi>sou</hi>, few <hi>fiu</hi>, down <hi>daun</hi>, sweet <hi>suit</hi>, &amp;.
</table>


<p>Y

<p><table rend="width(100%)">
<row><cell>I. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>ai</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong main&gtilde;on niini <hi>tyrant</hi>, <hi>deby</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Tyrant <hi>tairant</hi>, deby <hi>debai</hi>, rhyme <hi>raim</hi>, my <hi>mai</hi>, cry <hi>crai</hi>, &amp;.

<row><cell>II. <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ug in&gtilde;on sa <hi>i</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>liberty</hi>, <hi>fancy</hi>, &amp;.

<p>Liberty <hi>liberti</hi>, vanity <hi>vaniti</hi>, fancy <hi>fansi</hi>, &amp;.
</table>

<p>Quining letra <hi>y</hi> consonante man usab cun ana-a sa sinugdan sa usa ca pulong main&gtilde;on niini <hi>year</hi>, <hi>yard</hi>, <hi>yellow</hi>, &amp;.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>Ang m&gtilde;a regla n&gtilde;a guihatag co sa pagcaloas sa m&gtilde;a vocal duna man ug daghang m&gtilde;a pagcagauas <pb n=10 id=pb10>n&gtilde;a arang maquita sa gramática ug n&gtilde;a dili co ibutang dinhi cay malisud man ang pagpatima-an sa n&gtilde;atanan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a dili macatuman sa tolomanon n&gtilde;a guitodlo sa m&gtilde;a maalam sa iningles. Tacus man usab n&gtilde;a hibaloan sa magbabasa n&gtilde;a ang pagcasangpot sa m&gtilde;a letra n&gtilde;a guisulat co sa ita-as sa tagsa ca vocal dili matuman sa pagsulti sa iningles sa usa ca agui n&gtilde;a matinao. Busa ang m&gtilde;a macatoon nianang pinolon&gtilde;an magmacugui unta sa pagpamati sa m&gtilde;a americano, cay aron macadan&gtilde;at sia sa pagsulti sa dacong pagcahingpit.




<pb n=11 id=pb11>
</front>
<body>
<div1 id=s1 type=Section>
<head>Ang tao; lain laing m&gtilde;a pagcabutang nia.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The man               <cell>Ang tao
<row><cell lang=en>The men               <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a tao
<row><cell lang=en>The birth             <cell>Ang pagcatao
<row><cell lang=en>Infancy               <cell>Ang pagcabata
<row><cell lang=en>An infant             <cell>Usa ca puya
<row><cell lang=en>A child               <cell>Usa ca bata
<row><cell lang=en>Male child<note n=1 lang=ceb>Main&gtilde;on man n&gtilde;a sa binisaya quinahanglan n&gtilde;a ang m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>lalaqui</hi> ug <hi>babaye</hi> mucuyog guihapon sa m&gtilde;a sustantivo cun ang nagasulti may tuyo sa paglain sa masculino sa femenino, in&gtilde;on man usab sa iningles dunay <hi>male</hi> ug <hi>female</hi>, <hi>man</hi> ug <hi>woman</hi>, &amp;. ug uban pa n&gtilde;a guitodlo sa gramática. <hi>Male</hi> child, bata n&gtilde;a lalaqui; <hi>female</hi> child, bata n&gtilde;a babaye; <hi>man</hi> servant, sologo-on n&gtilde;a lalaqui; <hi>maid</hi> servant, sologo-on <corr sic=nga>n&gtilde;a</corr> babaye, &amp;. Quining tolomanon mao day pagasondon niadtong m&gtilde;a sustantivo n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay sa cahologan sa masculino ug femenino; in&gtilde;on man usab, dili sumpayon canang m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>male</hi>, <hi>female</hi>, &amp;. cun dili quinahanglanon ang paglain sa nagasulti sa lalaqui sa babaye, main&gtilde;on sa guituman sa binisaya.</note>         <cell>Batang lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Female child          <cell>Batang babaye
<row><cell lang=en>The children          <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>Childhood             <cell>Ang pagcabata
<row><cell lang=en>The boy               <cell>Ang batang lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>The girl              <cell>Ang batang babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Youth                 <cell>Ang pagcabag-ong tao
<row><cell lang=en>A bachelor            <cell>Usa ca olitao
<row><cell lang=en>A maid                <cell>Usa ca dalaga
<row><cell lang=en>Young man             <cell>Lalaqui n&gtilde;a batanon
<pb n=12 id=pb12><row><cell lang=en>Young woman           <cell>Babaye n&gtilde;a batanon
<row><cell lang=en>A man                 <cell>Usa ca lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>A woman               <cell>Usa ca babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Manhood               <cell>Ang pagcahamtong
<row><cell lang=en>The married man       <cell>Ang lalaqui n&gtilde;a miño
<row><cell lang=en>The married woman     <cell>Ang babaye n&gtilde;a miño
<row><cell lang=en>An unmarried man      <cell>Usa ca lalaqui n&gtilde;a dili miño
<row><cell lang=en>An unmarried woman    <cell>Usa ca babaye n&gtilde;a dili miño
<row><cell lang=en>Paternity             <cell>Ang pagcaamahan
<row><cell lang=en>Maternity             <cell>Ang pagcainahan
<row><cell lang=en>Marriage              <cell>Ang magtiayon
<row><cell lang=en>Matrimony             <cell>Ang pagtiayon
<row><cell lang=en>The widower           <cell>Ang balo n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>The widow             <cell>Ang balo n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Widowhood             <cell>Ang pagcabalo
<row><cell lang=en>Old age               <cell>Ang pagcatigulang
<row><cell lang=en>Old man               <cell>Lalaqui n&gtilde;a tigulang
<row><cell lang=en>Old woman             <cell>Babayeng tigulang
<row><cell lang=en>An orphan             <cell>Usa ca ilo
<row><cell lang=en>Death                 <cell>Ang camatayon
<row><cell lang=en>A master              <cell>Usa ca agalon
<row><cell lang=en>A servant             <cell>Usa ca sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>A slave               <cell>Usa ca olipon
<row><cell lang=en>A friend              <cell>Usa ca higala
<row><cell lang=en>An enemy              <cell>Usa ca caauay
<row><cell lang=en>A guardian            <cell>Usa ca magbabaton
<row><cell lang=en>A ward                <cell>Usa ca binatonan
<row><cell lang=en>An heir               <cell>Usa ca manununud
<row><cell lang=en>A rich man            <cell>Usa ca salapian
<pb n=13 id=pb13><row><cell lang=en>A poor man            <cell>Usa ca macalolooy
<row><cell lang=en>A beggar              <cell>Usa ca paquilimos
<row><cell lang=en>A wise man            <cell>Usa ca maquinaadmanon
<row><cell lang=en>An ignorant man       <cell>Usa ca cabús
<row><cell lang=en>A fortunate man       <cell>Usa ca taong palad-an
<row><cell lang=en>An unfortunate man    <cell>Usa ca tao n&gtilde;a ualay palad
<row><cell lang=en>A happy man           <cell>Usa ca bulahan
<row><cell lang=en>An unhappy man        <cell>Usa ca macalolooy
<row><cell lang=en>A white man           <cell>Usa ca taong maputi
<row><cell lang=en>A black man           <cell>Usa ca taong maitum
<row><cell lang=en>A half-breed          <cell>Usa ca mestizo
<row><cell lang=en>An owner              <cell>Usa ca tagya
<row><cell lang=en>A needed man          <cell>Usa ca mahan&gtilde;ul
<row><cell lang=en>A tall man            <cell>Usa ca tao n&gtilde;a hata-as
<row><cell lang=en>A small man           <cell>Usa ca taong hamubo
<row><cell lang=en>A dwarf               <cell>Usa ca alipondoc
<row><cell lang=en>A blind man           <cell>Usa ca buta
<row><cell lang=en>One-eyed person       <cell>Buta sa picas
<row><cell lang=en>Squint-eyed man       <cell>Libat
<row><cell lang=en>A deaf person         <cell>Usa ca bun&gtilde;ul
<row><cell lang=en>A dumb person         <cell>Usa ca mama
<row><cell lang=en>A lame person         <cell>Usa ca piang
<row><cell lang=en>A maimed man          <cell>Usa ca pungcol
<row><cell lang=en>A humpback            <cell>Usa ca boctot
<row><cell lang=en>A benumbed man        <cell>Usa ca bacol
<row><cell lang=en>A bald man            <cell>Usa ca upaon
<row><cell lang=en>A flat-nosed man      <cell>Usa ca pislat
<row><cell lang=en>A big-nosed man       <cell>Usa ca ilon&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>A big man             <cell>Usa ca taong supang
<row><cell lang=en>A lean person         <cell>Usa ca taong maniuang
<pb n=14 id=pb14><row><cell lang=en>A sick person         <cell>Usa ca masaquiton
<row><cell lang=en>A healthy man         <cell>Usa ca taong mapiscay ug lauas
<row><cell lang=en>The corpse            <cell>Ang minatay
<row><cell lang=en>The life              <cell>Ang quinabuhi
<row><cell lang=en>The name              <cell>Ang n&gtilde;alan
<row><cell lang=en>The surname           <cell>Ang bansagon
</table>


<div1 id=s2>
<head>Ang panimalay; ang pagcacaubanan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The family            <cell>Ang panimalay
<row><cell lang=en>The parents           <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a guinicanan
<row><cell lang=en>The husband           <cell>Ang bana
<row><cell lang=en>The wife              <cell>Ang asaua
<row><cell lang=en>Father                <cell>Amahan
<row><cell lang=en>Mother                <cell>Inahan
<row><cell lang=en>Nurse                 <cell>Iua. Pasisiua
<row><cell lang=en>Son                   <cell>Anac n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Daughter              <cell>Anac n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Grandfather           <cell>Apohan n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Grandmother           <cell>Apohan n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Grandson              <cell>Apo n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Granddaughter         <cell>Apo n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Step-father           <cell>Ama ama
<row><cell lang=en>Step-mother           <cell>Ina ina
<row><cell lang=en>Step-son              <cell>Hinabdos n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Step-daughter         <cell>Hinabdos n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Godfather             <cell>Ama-on
<row><cell lang=en>Godmother             <cell>Ina-on
<row><cell lang=en>Godson                <cell>Quinogos n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Goddaughter           <cell>Quinogos n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Brother               <cell>Igso-on n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<pb n=15 id=pb15><row><cell lang=en>Sister                <cell>Igso-on n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Twins                 <cell>M&gtilde;a caluha
<row><cell lang=en>Brotherhood           <cell>Caigso-onan
<row><cell lang=en>The eldest brother    <cell>Ang quinamagulan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Elder brother         <cell>Magulang
<row><cell lang=en>Younger brother       <cell>Manghod
<row><cell lang=en>Youngest brother      <cell>Quinamangholan
<row><cell lang=en>First-born            <cell>Pan&gtilde;anay
<row><cell lang=en>Relationship          <cell>Pagcacaubanan
<row><cell lang=en>Kindred               <cell>Cabanayan
<row><cell lang=en>The relations         <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a caubanan
<row><cell lang=en>Brother-in-law        <cell>Bayao n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Sister-in-law         <cell>Bayao n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Father-in-law         <cell>Ogan&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Mother-in-law         <cell>Ogan&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Son-in-law            <cell>Masamong
<row><cell lang=en>Daughter-in-law       <cell>Binalaye
<row><cell lang=en>Uncle                 <cell>Oyo-an
<row><cell lang=en>Aunt                  <cell>Ia-an
<row><cell lang=en>Nephew                <cell>Pagumangcon n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Niece                 <cell>Pagumangcon n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Male cousin           <cell>Igagao n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Female cousin         <cell>Igagao n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>First cousin          <cell>Igagao itagsa
<row><cell lang=en>Second cousin         <cell>Igagao itagurha
<row><cell lang=en>Foster brothers       <cell>Magso-on sa gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Natural child         <cell>Anac sa goa
<row><cell lang=en>Forefathers           <cell>M&gtilde;a catigulan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Offspring             <cell>M&gtilde;a caliuatan
<pb n=16 id=pb16><row><cell lang=en>Betrothal             <cell>Pamalaye
<row><cell lang=en>Bridegroom            <cell>Palamanhon
<row><cell lang=en>Bride                 <cell>Pan&gtilde;asauon
<row><cell lang=en>Wedding               <cell>Pagcasal
</table>


<div1 id=s3>
<head>Ang calag; ang m&gtilde;a virtud ug ang m&gtilde;a vicio.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The soul              <cell>Ang calag
<row><cell lang=en>Memory                <cell>Panomdoman
<row><cell lang=en>Reason                <cell>Huna huna
<row><cell lang=en>Understanding         <cell>Ihihibalo
<row><cell lang=en>Wisdom                <cell>Quinaadman
<row><cell lang=en>Will                  <cell>Cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>To will               <cell>Pagbuut
<row><cell lang=en>To think              <cell>Paghuna huna
<row><cell lang=en>Mind                  <cell>Huna huna
<row><cell lang=en>Knowledge             <cell>Paghibalo. Caalam
<row><cell lang=en>To wish               <cell>Pagtin&gtilde;uha
<row><cell lang=en>To love               <cell>Paghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>To hate               <cell>Pagcadumut
<row><cell lang=en>To understand         <cell>Pagsabot
<row><cell lang=en>To comprehend         <cell>Pagtoquib
<row><cell lang=en>To know               <cell>Paghibalo
<row><cell lang=en>To remind             <cell>Pagdumdum
<row><cell lang=en>To doubt              <cell>Pagduha duha
<row><cell lang=en>The love              <cell>Ang gugma
<row><cell lang=en>The hatred            <cell>Ang cadumut
<row><cell lang=en>Wish. Desire          <cell>Tin&gtilde;oha
<row><cell lang=en>Thought               <cell>Huna huna
<row><cell lang=en>Forgetfulness         <cell>Paghicalimot
<row><cell lang=en>Suspicion             <cell>Catahap
<row><cell lang=en>Shame                 <cell>Caulao
<pb n=17 id=pb17><row><cell lang=en>Honor                 <cell>Cadongganan
<row><cell lang=en>Virtue                <cell>Virtud
<row><cell lang=en>Vice                  <cell>Vicio
<row><cell lang=en>Sin                   <cell>Sala
<row><cell lang=en>Sinner                <cell>Macasasala
<row><cell lang=en>Fault                 <cell>Paglapas
<row><cell lang=en>Goodness              <cell>Caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Evil                  <cell>Cadaot
<row><cell lang=en>Faith                 <cell>Pagto-o
<row><cell lang=en>Hope                  <cell>Paglaom
<row><cell lang=en>Charity               <cell>Paghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>The lover             <cell>Ang nahagugma
<row><cell lang=en>The loved             <cell>Ang hinigugma
<row><cell lang=en>Justice               <cell>Cataron&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>A just                <cell>Usa ca matarung
<row><cell lang=en>An unjust             <cell>Usa ca taong dili matarung
<row><cell lang=en>Prudence              <cell>Pagcabuutan
<row><cell lang=en>Fortitude             <cell>Calig-onan
<row><cell lang=en>Temperance            <cell>Casaran&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Pride                 <cell>Pagpalabi labi
<row><cell lang=en>Humility              <cell>Pagpaubus
<row><cell lang=en>Covetousness          <cell>Cahicao
<row><cell lang=en>Liberality            <cell>Calolot
<row><cell lang=en>Anger                 <cell>Caligutgut
<row><cell lang=en>Patience              <cell>Pagantos
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Gluttomy>Gluttony</corr>              <cell>Caulit
<row><cell lang=en>Envy                  <cell>Casina
<row><cell lang=en>A proud man           <cell>Usa ca palabilabihon
<row><cell lang=en>A humble man          <cell>Usa ca mapaubsanon
<row><cell lang=en>A covetous man        <cell>Usa ca mahicaon
<pb n=18 id=pb18><row><cell lang=en>The angry man         <cell>Ang maligutguton
<row><cell lang=en>The envious man       <cell>Ang masinahon
<row><cell lang=en>Meekness              <cell>Caaghop
<row><cell lang=en>Kindness              <cell>Pagcalolot
<row><cell lang=en>Sloth                 <cell>Cataca
<row><cell lang=en>Diligence             <cell>Cacogui
<row><cell lang=en>Piety                 <cell>Puan&gtilde;ud
<row><cell lang=en>Clemency              <cell>Calooy
<row><cell lang=en>Chastity              <cell>Caolay
<row><cell lang=en>Obedience             <cell>Pagsogot
<row><cell lang=en>A lie                 <cell>Usa ca pagbacac
<row><cell lang=en>A <corr sic=lier>liar</corr>                <cell>Usa ca bacacon
<row><cell lang=en>A thief               <cell>Usa ca cauatan
<row><cell lang=en>Vanity                <cell>Parayeg
<row><cell lang=en>Haughty               <cell>Palabilabihon
<row><cell lang=en>Naughty               <cell>Dautan
<row><cell lang=en>Showy                 <cell>Parayegon
<row><cell lang=en>Boaster               <cell>Maandacon
<row><cell lang=en>Gambler               <cell>Sugarol
<row><cell lang=en>Cautious              <cell>Buutan
<row><cell lang=en>Docile                <cell>Masinogtanon
<row><cell lang=en>Foolish               <cell>Hon&gtilde;og. Buang
<row><cell lang=en>Crafty                <cell>Maloibon
<row><cell lang=en>Fearful               <cell>Mahadlocon
<row><cell lang=en>Rascal                <cell>Tampalasan
<row><cell lang=en>Brave                 <cell>Maisug
<row><cell lang=en>Cruel                 <cell>Mapintas
<row><cell lang=en>Deceitful             <cell>Malimbon&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>Stupid                <cell>Maborong
<row><cell lang=en>Courteous             <cell>Maabiabihon
<row><cell lang=en>Grave                 <cell>Maligdong
<pb n=19 id=pb19><row><cell lang=en>Discreet              <cell>Buutan
<row><cell lang=en>Quarrelsome           <cell>Tigcasamoc
<row><cell lang=en>Rash                  <cell>Man&gtilde;ahason
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Afable>Affable</corr>                <cell>Nayanayaon
<row><cell lang=en>Charitable            <cell>Maloloyon
<row><cell lang=en>Diligent              <cell>Mapiscayon
<row><cell lang=en>Faithful              <cell>Saliganan
<row><cell lang=en>Generous              <cell>Maghalatagon
<row><cell lang=en>Merciful              <cell>Manguilooyan
<row><cell lang=en>Merciless             <cell>Ualay calooy
<row><cell lang=en>Patient               <cell>Maantoson
<row><cell lang=en>Selfish               <cell>Sinacoan
<row><cell lang=en>Light                 <cell>Maga-an ug buut
<row><cell lang=en>Coward                <cell>Talaoan
<row><cell lang=en>Tale-bearer           <cell>Tabian
<row><cell lang=en>Flatterer             <cell>Tigolog olog
<row><cell lang=en>Grateful              <cell>Matalamdon
<row><cell lang=en>Ungrateful            <cell>Dili matalamdon
<row><cell lang=en>Slothful              <cell>Tapolan
<row><cell lang=en>Idle. Lazy            <cell>Balanghon
<row><cell lang=en>Prodigal              <cell>Mausicon
<row><cell lang=en>Adulterer             <cell>Tigpanapao
<row><cell lang=en>Murderer              <cell>Mamomono
<row><cell lang=en>Swearer               <cell>Tigpamalicas
<row><cell lang=en>Slanderer             <cell>Tigbutang butang
<row><cell lang=en>Censurer              <cell>Malibacon
<row><cell lang=en>Drunkard              <cell>Palahubog
<row><cell lang=en>Jealous               <cell>Magbuho-on
<row><cell lang=en>Revengeful            <cell>Magbabalos ug dautan
<row><cell lang=en>Guilty                <cell>Malapason
<row><cell lang=en>Polite                <cell>Matinahoron
<pb n=20 id=pb20><row><cell lang=en>Disobedient           <cell>Masuquihon
<row><cell lang=en>Careless              <cell>Ualay pagbantay
<row><cell lang=en>Careful               <cell>Magbinantayon
<row><cell lang=en>Diligent              <cell>Macoguihon
<row><cell lang=en>Constant              <cell>Magpadayon
<row><cell lang=en>Devout                <cell>Devotos
<row><cell lang=en>Lewd                  <cell>Maolag
<row><cell lang=en>Passionate            <cell>Maligotgoton
<row><cell lang=en>Merry                 <cell>Malipayon
<row><cell lang=en>Impudent              <cell>Ualay caulao
<row><cell lang=en>Assiduous             <cell>Matinumanon
<row><cell lang=en>Lovely                <cell>Hiligugmaon
<row><cell lang=en>The calumny           <cell>Ang butang butang
<row><cell lang=en>The compassion        <cell>Ang calooy
<row><cell lang=en>The fear              <cell>Ang cahadluc
<row><cell lang=en>A crime               <cell>Usa ca dacong sala
<row><cell lang=en>The cruelty           <cell>Ang caban&gtilde;is
<row><cell lang=en>The cupidity          <cell>Ang caibog
<row><cell lang=en>Disgust               <cell>Casaquit
<row><cell lang=en>The error             <cell>Ang sayop
<row><cell lang=en>The flattery          <cell>Ang pagcaolog olog
<row><cell lang=en>The knavery           <cell>Ang pagcalimbong
<row><cell lang=en>The ignorance         <cell>Ang pagcacabús
<row><cell lang=en>The imbecility        <cell>Ang pagcahon&gtilde;og
<row><cell lang=en>The incredulity       <cell>Ang pagcaualay pagto-o
<row><cell lang=en>Indifference          <cell>Ang pagcaualay tagad
<row><cell lang=en>Iniquity              <cell>Ang pagcadautan
<row><cell lang=en>Innocence             <cell>Ang pagcaputung
<row><cell lang=en>Wickedness            <cell>Ang pagcadautan
<row><cell lang=en>Zeal                  <cell>Caicog
</table>



<pb n=21 id=pb21>
<div1 id=s4>
<head>Ang lauas sa tao; ang m&gtilde;a balatian.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The human body        <cell>Ang lauas sa tao
<row><cell lang=en>The senses            <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a balatian
<row><cell lang=en>The head              <cell>Ang olo
<row><cell lang=en>Face                  <cell>Naong
<row><cell lang=en>Forehead              <cell>Agtang
<row><cell lang=en>Hair                  <cell>Buhoc
<row><cell lang=en>Crown of the head     <cell>Alingpolo
<row><cell lang=en>Temple                <cell>Dun&gtilde;an dun&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>An eye                <cell>Usa ca mata
<row><cell lang=en>Eyelids               <cell>M&gtilde;a tabontabon
<row><cell lang=en>Eye-lash              <cell>Piloc
<row><cell lang=en>Eye-brow              <cell>Quilay
<row><cell lang=en>Apple of the eye      <cell>Calimutao
<row><cell lang=en>To wink               <cell>Pagpamiloc
<row><cell lang=en>Sight                 <cell>Ang italanao
<row><cell lang=en>To see                <cell>Pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>To look at            <cell>Pagtanao. Pagsolong
<row><cell lang=en>To peep               <cell>Paglili
<row><cell lang=en>To hint               <cell>Pagquilo
<row><cell lang=en>To weep               <cell>Paghilac
<row><cell lang=en>The ear               <cell>Ang dalonggan
<row><cell lang=en>Hearing               <cell>Idolon&gtilde;og
<row><cell lang=en>To hear               <cell>Pagcadun&gtilde;og
<row><cell lang=en>To listen             <cell>Pagpatalinghog
<row><cell lang=en>The nose              <cell>Ang ilong
<row><cell lang=en>Nostrils              <cell>M&gtilde;a lon&gtilde;ag-an
<row><cell lang=en>To smell              <cell>Pagpaninghot
<row><cell lang=en>Smell                 <cell>Isilinghot
<pb n=22 id=pb22><row><cell lang=en>The mouth             <cell>Ang baba
<row><cell lang=en>A tooth               <cell>Usa ca n&gtilde;ipon
<row><cell lang=en>The teeth             <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;ipon
<row><cell lang=en>The canine-teeth      <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a tan&gtilde;o
<row><cell lang=en>The molar-teeth       <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a bag-ang
<row><cell lang=en>Gum                   <cell>Lag-os
<row><cell lang=en>The tongue            <cell>Ang dilá
<row><cell lang=en>Lips                  <cell>M&gtilde;a n&gtilde;abil
<row><cell lang=en>The palate            <cell>Ang alin&gtilde;agn&gtilde;ag
<row><cell lang=en>Taste                 <cell>Itililao
<row><cell lang=en>To taste              <cell>Pagtilao
<row><cell lang=en>To eat                <cell>Pagcaon
<row><cell lang=en>To drink              <cell>Paginom
<row><cell lang=en>The chin              <cell>Ang solang
<row><cell lang=en>The brain             <cell>Ang otoc
<row><cell lang=en>The skull             <cell>Ang bagol bagol
<row><cell lang=en>The cheeks            <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a aping
<row><cell lang=en>The neck              <cell>Ang li-og
<row><cell lang=en>The nape of the neck  <cell>Ang tangcogo
<row><cell lang=en>Adam&apos;s apple          <cell>Poac
<row><cell lang=en>Throat                <cell>Totonlan
<row><cell lang=en>Shoulders             <cell>M&gtilde;a abaga
<row><cell lang=en>The breast            <cell>Ang dughan
<row><cell lang=en>A rib                 <cell>Usa ca gosoc
<row><cell lang=en>The backbone          <cell>Ang talodtod
<row><cell lang=en>The articulations     <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a lutahan
<row><cell lang=en>The stomach           <cell>Ang coto coto
<row><cell lang=en>Sides                 <cell>M&gtilde;a quilid
<row><cell lang=en>Belly                 <cell>Tiyan
<row><cell lang=en>Lap                   <cell>Sabac-an
<row><cell lang=en>The back              <cell>Ang boco boco
<pb n=23 id=pb23><row><cell lang=en>The waist             <cell>Ang hauac
<row><cell lang=en>Breasts               <cell>Ang suso<!--Tagalog; Cebuano: tutoy -->
<row><cell lang=en>An arm                <cell>Usa ca bucton
<row><cell lang=en>Arm-pit               <cell>Iloc
<row><cell lang=en>Elbow                 <cell>Sico
<row><cell lang=en>Wrist                 <cell>Popolan
<row><cell lang=en>A hand                <cell>Usa ca camot
<row><cell lang=en>The right hand        <cell>Ang too
<row><cell lang=en>The left hand         <cell>Ang uala
<row><cell lang=en>The palm              <cell>Ang palad
<row><cell lang=en>A finger              <cell>Usa ca todlo
<row><cell lang=en>The thumb             <cell>Ang cumalagco
<row><cell lang=en>The forefinger        <cell>Ang itotodlo
<row><cell lang=en>The heart-finger      <cell>Ang tangboso
<row><cell lang=en>The ring-finger       <cell>Ang cuminlay
<row><cell lang=en>The little-finger     <cell>Ang cumingquing
<row><cell lang=en>The fist              <cell>Ang concon
<row><cell lang=en>Touch                 <cell>Ihilicap
<row><cell lang=en>To touch              <cell>Paghicap. Pagcobil
<row><cell lang=en>A leg                 <cell>Usa ca pa-a
<row><cell lang=en>Buttock               <cell>Dape dape
<row><cell lang=en>Groins                <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a bolog
<row><cell lang=en>Hips                  <cell>M&gtilde;a balatang
<row><cell lang=en>The knee              <cell>Ang tohod
<row><cell lang=en>The calf              <cell>Ang bates, bitiis
<row><cell lang=en>The ankle             <cell>Ang singcod
<row><cell lang=en>A foot                <cell>Usa ca ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>The feet              <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>The sole              <cell>Ang lapa lapa
<row><cell lang=en>The toes              <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a todlo sa ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>Heel                  <cell>Ticod
<pb n=24 id=pb24><row><cell lang=en>Skin                  <cell>Panit
<row><cell lang=en>The bones             <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a <corr sic=bucoc>bucog</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Flesh                 <cell>Onod
<row><cell lang=en>The nerves            <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a cusug
<row><cell lang=en>The veins             <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a ogat
<row><cell lang=en>The heart             <cell>Ang casing casing
<row><cell lang=en>Liver                 <cell>Atay
<row><cell lang=en>Lungs                 <cell>M&gtilde;a bag-a
<row><cell lang=en>Kidneys               <cell>M&gtilde;a amimislon
<row><cell lang=en>Spleen                <cell>Hagolila
<row><cell lang=en>Bile                  <cell>Apdo
<row><cell lang=en>Blood                 <cell>Dugo
<row><cell lang=en>Guts                  <cell>Tinay
<row><cell lang=en>Sweat                 <cell>Sin&gtilde;ut
<row><cell lang=en>Tears                 <cell>M&gtilde;a luha
<row><cell lang=en>Phlegm                <cell>Sip-on
<row><cell lang=en>Spittle               <cell>Loa
<row><cell lang=en>Slaver                <cell>Lauay
<row><cell lang=en>Beard                 <cell>Bun&gtilde;ut
<row><cell lang=en>Moustache             <cell>Bigote
<row><cell lang=en>Down                  <cell>Balhibo
<row><cell lang=en>The nails             <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a coco
<row><cell lang=en>Freckles              <cell>M&gtilde;a boloc
<row><cell lang=en>Blearedness <!-- The white matter that appears in your eyes in the morning -->                      <cell>Mota
<row><cell lang=en>Mole                                 <cell>Alom
</table>


<div1 id=s5>
<head><corr sic=Laing>Lain</corr> laing m&gtilde;a butang n&gtilde;a nahatun&gtilde;ud sa lauas.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Laughter              <cell>Pagcataua
<row><cell lang=en>Weeping               <cell>Pagcahilac
<pb n=25 id=pb25><row><cell lang=en>Respiration           <cell>Pagginhaua
<row><cell lang=en>Sigh                  <cell>Paghupao
<row><cell lang=en>Sobbing               <cell>Pagbacho
<row><cell lang=en>Sneezing              <cell>Pagbaha-on
<row><cell lang=en>Thirst                <cell>Cauhao
<row><cell lang=en>Hunger                <cell>Gutum
<row><cell lang=en>Sleep                 <cell>Pagcatolog
<row><cell lang=en>Waking                <cell>Pagtucao
<row><cell lang=en>Rest                  <cell>Paghouay
<row><cell lang=en>Lassitude             <cell>Cabudlay. Calaylay
<row><cell lang=en>Voice                 <cell>Tin&gtilde;ug
<row><cell lang=en>Beauty                <cell>Catahom
<row><cell lang=en>Ugliness              <cell>Can&gtilde;il-ad
<row><cell lang=en>Health                <cell>Capiscay
<row><cell lang=en>Illness               <cell>Casaquit
<row><cell lang=en>Tallness              <cell>Cata-as
<row><cell lang=en>Meagreness            <cell>Caniuang
<row><cell lang=en>Look                  <cell>Daguay
<row><cell lang=en>Weakness              <cell>Caluya
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Strengh>Strength</corr>               <cell>Caisug. Cusug
<row><cell lang=en>Appearance            <cell>Panauay
<row><cell lang=en>Yawning               <cell>Paghuyab
<row><cell lang=en>Stretching            <cell>Paghibid
<row><cell lang=en>Hiccough              <cell>Sid-oc
<row><cell lang=en>Belching              <cell>Pagpan&gtilde;ogab
<row><cell lang=en>Kiss                  <cell>Haloc
<row><cell lang=en>Blowing               <cell>Hoyop
<row><cell lang=en>Fatness               <cell>Catamboc
<row><cell lang=en>Corpulent             <cell>Supang
<row><cell lang=en>Stout                 <cell>Maisug
<row><cell lang=en>Lean                  <cell>Maniuang
<pb n=26 id=pb26><row><cell lang=en>Black hair                       <cell>Buhoc n&gtilde;a maitum
<row><cell lang=en>Red hair                         <cell>Buhoc n&gtilde;a bulagao
<row><cell lang=en>Gray hair                        <cell>Ubanon
<row><cell lang=en>Curled hair                      <cell>Culon&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>Digestion                        <cell>Pagcalinis
<row><cell lang=en>To make water <!-- i.e., To urinate -->                    <cell>Pagihi
<row><cell lang=en>To whistle                       <cell>Pagtihol
<row><cell lang=en>To kiss                          <cell>Paghaloc
<row><cell lang=en>To breathe                       <cell>Pagginhaoa
<row><cell lang=en>To blow                          <cell>Paghoyop
<row><cell lang=en>To cry                           <cell>Pagtiabao
<row><cell lang=en>To sing                          <cell>Pagcanta
<row><cell lang=en>To sleep                         <cell>Pagcatolog
<row><cell lang=en>To dream                         <cell>Pagdanggo
<row><cell lang=en>To snore                         <cell>Paghagoc
<row><cell lang=en>To be hungry                     <cell>Paggutum
<row><cell lang=en>To be thirsty                    <cell>Paguhao
</table>


<div1 id=s6>
<head>M&gtilde;a saquit.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Fever. Ague                      <cell>Hilanat
<row><cell lang=en>Cold                             <cell>Sip-on
<row><cell lang=en>Cough                            <cell>Obo
<row><cell lang=en>Swelling                         <cell>Hobag
<row><cell lang=en>Scab                             <cell>Pono
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Ytch>Itch</corr>       <cell>Nuca
<row><cell lang=en>Wound                            <cell>Samad
<row><cell lang=en>Asthma                           <cell>Cutas
<row><cell lang=en>Consumption                      <cell>Etica. Tisis
<row><cell lang=en>An&oelig;mia                        <cell>Culang ug dugo
<row><cell lang=en>Vertigo                          <cell>Alipolong
<pb n=27 id=pb27><row><cell lang=en>Wen                               <cell>Boctol
<row><cell lang=en>Pimples                           <cell>Bugas
<row><cell lang=en>Fistula                           <cell>Potic
<row><cell lang=en>Leprosy                           <cell>Balahac
<row><cell lang=en>Small-pox                         <cell>Boti
<row><cell lang=en>Dropsy                            <cell>Hopong
<row><cell lang=en>Tetters <!-- Skin disease, such as ringworm -->                           <cell>Bon-i
<row><cell lang=en>Bloody flux                       <cell>Calibang ug dugo
<row><cell lang=en>Cut                               <cell>Putul
<row><cell lang=en>Fall                              <cell>Pagcaholog
<row><cell lang=en>Scarlatine <!-- Scarlet fever -->                        <cell>Dalap <!-- Measles according to Wolff -->
<row><cell lang=en>Measles                           <cell>Tipdas
<row><cell lang=en>Rupture                           <cell>Damlac
<row><cell lang=en>Giddiness                         <cell>Pagtupad
<row><cell lang=en>Flea-bite                         <cell>Bon&gtilde;ag sin&gtilde;ot
<row><cell lang=en>Erysipelas                        <cell>Apoy
<row><cell lang=en>Rheum                             <cell>So-ot
<row><cell lang=en>Dew-worm                          <cell>Bitoc
<row><cell lang=en>Burn                              <cell>Pagcasunug
<row><cell lang=en>Cancer                            <cell>Cancer
<row><cell lang=en>Blindness                         <cell>Pagcabuta
<row><cell lang=en>Cholera                           <cell>Cólera
<row><cell lang=en>Boil                              <cell>Cobal  <!-- Actually callus; boil is hubal -->
<row><cell lang=en>Madness                           <cell><corr sic=Pogcabuang>Pagcabuang</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Dysentery                         <cell>Paghibolos
<row><cell lang=en>Poisoning                         <cell>Pagcahilo
<row><cell lang=en>Swoon                             <cell>Capugdao
<row><cell lang=en>Fracture                          <cell>Pagcabali sa bucoc <!-- Wolff gives piang -->
<row><cell lang=en>Gout                              <cell>Tibac
<row><cell lang=en>Hemorrhoids                       <cell>But-but
<row><cell lang=en>Sick headache                     <cell>Tampihac
<pb n=28 id=pb28><row><cell lang=en>Dumbness                         <cell>Pagcamama
<row><cell lang=en>Plague                           <cell>Peste
<row><cell lang=en>Sting                            <cell>Pinac-an
<row><cell lang=en>Deafness                         <cell>Pagcabon&gtilde;ol
<row><cell lang=en>Whitlow                          <cell>Basol
<row><cell lang=en>Furuncle                         <cell>Balusot
<row><cell lang=en>Earache                          <cell>Saquit sa dalonggan
<row><cell lang=en>Head-ache                        <cell>Calabad sa olo
<row><cell lang=en>Tooth-ache                       <cell>Saquit sa bag-ang
<row><cell lang=en>Stomach-ache                     <cell>Caso-ol sa coto coto
<row><cell lang=en>Sore eyes                        <cell>Taguimata
<row><cell lang=en>Sore fingers                     <cell>Saquit sa m&gtilde;a todlo
<row><cell lang=en>Sore throat                      <cell>Saquit sa totonlan
<row><cell lang=en>Sore feet                        <cell>Saquit sa m&gtilde;a ti-il
</table>


<div1 id=s7>
<head>M&gtilde;a tambal.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sarsaparrilla                    <cell>Banag
<row><cell lang=en>Philippine oil                   <cell>Tagolaoay
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Purslain>Purslane</corr>                         <cell>Olasiman
<row><cell lang=en>Immortelle                       <cell>Siempreviva
<row><cell lang=en>Sage                             <cell>Dalapot. Gabon
<row><cell lang=en>Rhubarb                          <cell>Ruibarbo
<row><cell lang=en>Rue                              <cell>Ruda
<row><cell lang=en>Rosemary                         <cell>Romero
<row><cell lang=en>Quinina                          <cell>Quinina. Dita
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Camomile>Chamomile</corr>                         <cell>Manzanilla
<row><cell lang=en>Mallows                          <cell>Tabin
<row><cell lang=en>Nightshade                       <cell>Lubi lubi
<row><cell lang=en>Mint                             <cell>Yerba buena
<row><cell lang=en>Ricinus                          <cell>Tan&gtilde;an tan&gtilde;an
<pb n=29 id=pb29><row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Saffrom>Saffron</corr>                          <cell>Dulao
<row><cell lang=en>Balsamine                        <cell>Palea
<row><cell lang=en>Coloquintida                     <cell>Salag salag
<row><cell lang=en>Betel-nut                        <cell>Bonga
<row><cell lang=en>Egg-plant                        <cell>Talon
<row><cell lang=en>Mug-wort                         <cell>Bangcodo
<row><cell lang=en>Celery                           <cell>Apio
<row><cell lang=en>Elder                            <cell>Saliargao
<row><cell lang=en>Chaste-tree                      <cell>Lagundi
<row><cell lang=en>Ginger                           <cell>Luy-a
<row><cell lang=en>Aloe                             <cell>Acibar
<row><cell lang=en>Antypirine                       <cell>Antipirina
<row><cell lang=en>Camphor                          <cell>Alcanfor
<row><cell lang=en>Camphorate brandy                <cell>Aguardinte alcanforado
<row><cell lang=en>Chloroform                       <cell>Cloroformo
<row><cell lang=en>Ether                            <cell>Eter
<row><cell lang=en>Laudanum                         <cell>Láudano
<row><cell lang=en>Opium                            <cell>Opio
<row><cell lang=en>Ptisan                           <cell>Tisana
<row><cell lang=en>Purge                            <cell>Purga
<row><cell lang=en>Ointment                         <cell>Pomada
<row><cell lang=en>Pill                             <cell>Píldoras
<row><cell lang=en>Morphine                         <cell>Morfina
<row><cell lang=en>Magnesia                         <cell>Magnesia
<row><cell lang=en>Mustard                          <cell>Mostaza
<row><cell lang=en>Linseed-meal                     <cell>Harina de linaza
<row><cell lang=en>Cerato                           <cell>Cerato
<row><cell lang=en>Fruit salt                       <cell>Sal de frutas
<row><cell lang=en>Cathartic salt                   <cell>Sal catártica
<row><cell lang=en>Sedlits salt                     <cell>Sedlitz
<row><cell lang=en>Baths                            <cell>M&gtilde;a pagcaligo
<pb n=30 id=pb30><row><cell lang=en>Medicine                         <cell>Tambal
<row><cell lang=en>Frictions                        <cell>Pagcahilot
<row><cell lang=en>Cupping-glass                    <cell>Ventosa
<row><cell lang=en>Clyster                          <cell>Lavativa
<row><cell lang=en>Cataplasm                        <cell>Hampol
<row><cell lang=en>Bandage                          <cell>Ba-at
<row><cell lang=en>To cure                          <cell>Pagtambal
<row><cell lang=en>To bathe                         <cell>Pagcaligo
<row><cell lang=en>To vaccinate                     <cell>Pagcadlit
</table>


<div1 id=s8>
<head>Ang ciudad.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>City. Town                       <cell>Ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>Street                           <cell>Dalan
<row><cell lang=en>Walk                             <cell>Sodoy sodoyan
<row><cell lang=en>Garden                           <cell>Tanaman sa m&gtilde;a bulac
<row><cell lang=en>Botanical garden                 <cell>Jardín botánico
<row><cell lang=en>House                            <cell>Balay
<row><cell lang=en>City-hall                        <cell>Municipio
<row><cell lang=en>Cathedral                        <cell>Catedral
<row><cell lang=en>Church                           <cell>Singbahan
<row><cell lang=en>Convent                          <cell>Convento
<row><cell lang=en>Nunnery                          <cell>Convento sa m&gtilde;a monja
<row><cell lang=en>Palace                           <cell>Palacio
<row><cell lang=en>Quarter                          <cell>Cuartel
<row><cell lang=en>Hospital                         <cell>Hospital
<row><cell lang=en>Tower                            <cell>Cota
<row><cell lang=en>Custom-house                     <cell>Aduana
<row><cell lang=en>Post-office                      <cell>Administracion sa correos
<row><cell lang=en>Market                           <cell>Tianggui. Mercado
<pb n=31 id=pb31><row><cell lang=en>College                          <cell>Colegio
<row><cell lang=en>Seminary                         <cell>Seminario
<row><cell lang=en>School-house                     <cell>Escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Naval academy                    <cell>Academia naval
<row><cell lang=en>Military academy                 <cell>Academia militar
<row><cell lang=en>University                       <cell>Universidad
<row><cell lang=en>Lyceum                           <cell>Liceo
<row><cell lang=en>Square                           <cell>Plaza
<row><cell lang=en>Theatre                          <cell>Teatro
<row><cell lang=en>Telegraph office                 <cell>Oficina sa telégrafos
<row><cell lang=en>Hotel                            <cell>Hotel
<row><cell lang=en>Inn                              <cell>Doong
<row><cell lang=en>Restaurant                       <cell>Restaurant
<row><cell lang=en>Shop                             <cell>Tienda
<row><cell lang=en>Manufactory                      <cell>Fábrica
<row><cell lang=en>Stores                           <cell>Almacenes
<row><cell lang=en>Stationery                       <cell>Baliguia-an ug papel, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>Bakery                           <cell>Buluhatan ug pan
<row><cell lang=en>Brewery                          <cell>Buluhatan ug cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Pottery                          <cell>Buluhatan ug m&gtilde;a <corr sic=colong>colon</corr>, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>Groceries                        <cell>Baliguia-an ug panacot
<row><cell lang=en>Dairy                            <cell>Baliguia-an ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Printing-office                  <cell>Imprenta
<row><cell lang=en>Shoemaker&apos;s shop                 <cell>Buluhatan ug m&gtilde;a sapin
<row><cell lang=en>Blacksmith&apos;s shop                <cell>Herrería
<row><cell lang=en>Linen-draper&apos;s shop              <cell>Baliguia-an ug panapton n&gtilde;a hilo
<row><cell lang=en>Dispensary                       <cell>Botica. Farmacia
<row><cell lang=en>Laundry                          <cell>Bunac-an
<row><cell lang=en>Book-seller&apos;s shop               <cell>Baliguia-an ug m&gtilde;a libro
<pb n=32 id=pb32><row><cell lang=en>Tailor shop                    <cell>Sastrería. Tahianan
<row><cell lang=en>Barber shop                    <cell>Barbería. Alotanan
<row><cell lang=en>Jail                           <cell>Bilanggoan
<row><cell lang=en>Gambling-house                 <cell>Sugal-an
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-house                   <cell>Café
<row><cell lang=en>Cockfight                      <cell>Bulan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Bar                            <cell>Tanguayan
<row><cell lang=en>Billiards saloon               <cell>Dula-an sa billar
<row><cell lang=en>Cigar store                    <cell>Baliguia-an ug tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>Upholstery                     <cell>Baliguia-an sa m&gtilde;a mueble
<row><cell lang=en>Confectionery                  <cell>Baliguia-an ug matamis
<row><cell lang=en>Millinery                      <cell>Modista
<row><cell lang=en>Hemp-market                    <cell>Mercado sa lanot
<row><cell lang=en>Rice-market                    <cell>Tianggui sa bugas
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar-market                   <cell>Tianggui sa azucar
<row><cell lang=en>Fish-market                    <cell>Tianggui sa m&gtilde;a isda
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Jewerly resp=Errata>Jewelry</corr>                        <cell>Baliguia-an sa m&gtilde;a hias
<row><cell lang=en>Watchmaker&apos;s shop              <cell>Buluhatan sa m&gtilde;a horasan
<row><cell lang=en>Bank                           <cell>Banco
</table>


<div1 id=s9>
<head>Ang singbahan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The cathedral                  <cell>Ang catedral
<row><cell lang=en>The church                     <cell>Ang singbahan
<row><cell lang=en>The chapel                     <cell>Ang capilla
<row><cell lang=en>The oratory                    <cell>Ang oratorio
<row><cell lang=en>The cemetery                   <cell>Ang cementerio
<row><cell lang=en>A grave                        <cell>Usa ca <corr sic="lun&gtilde;anan">lubn&gtilde;anan</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>The steeple                    <cell>Ang torre
<row><cell lang=en>The belfry                     <cell>Ang campanario
<pb n=33 id=pb33><row><cell lang=en>The cupola                     <cell>Ang cúpula
<row><cell lang=en>The naves                      <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a nave
<row><cell lang=en>An altar                       <cell>Usa ca altar
<row><cell lang=en>High altar                     <cell>Altar mayor
<row><cell lang=en>The pulpit                     <cell>Ang ualihan
<row><cell lang=en>Praying-desk                   <cell>Lodhanan
<row><cell lang=en>The organ                      <cell>Ang órgano
<row><cell lang=en>The confessional               <cell>Ang confesalan
<row><cell lang=en>Benches                        <cell>M&gtilde;a banco
<row><cell lang=en>An image                       <cell>Usa ca larauan
<row><cell lang=en>A picture                      <cell>Usa ca cuadro
<row><cell lang=en>Bells                          <cell>M&gtilde;a campana
<row><cell lang=en>A bell                         <cell>Usa ca campanilla
<row><cell lang=en>The parish                     <cell>Ang parroquia
<row><cell lang=en>Amice                          <cell>Amito
<row><cell lang=en>Alb                            <cell>Alba
<row><cell lang=en>Girdle                         <cell>Cíngulo
<row><cell lang=en>Stole                          <cell>Estola
<row><cell lang=en>Maniple                        <cell>Manípulo
<row><cell lang=en>Chasuble                       <cell>Casulla
<row><cell lang=en>Cope                           <cell>Capa
<row><cell lang=en>Dalmatica                      <cell>Dalmática
<row><cell lang=en>Mitre                          <cell>Mitra
<row><cell lang=en>Chalice                        <cell>Caliz
<row><cell lang=en>Paten                          <cell>Patena
<row><cell lang=en>Altar-cloth                    <cell>Manteles
<row><cell lang=en>Linen altar                    <cell>Corporales
<row><cell lang=en>Monstrance                     <cell>Viril
<row><cell lang=en>Pix                            <cell>Copon
<row><cell lang=en>Pax                            <cell>La paz. Portapaz
<row><cell lang=en>Censer                         <cell>Incensario
<pb n=34 id=pb34><row><cell lang=en>Vessel for incense             <cell>Naveta
<row><cell lang=en>Holy-water-pot                 <cell>Acetre
<row><cell lang=en>Cross                          <cell>Cruz
<row><cell lang=en>Crucifix                       <cell>Crucifijo
<row><cell lang=en>Surplice                       <cell>Sobrepelliz
<row><cell lang=en>Small cassock                  <cell>Sotanilla
<row><cell lang=en>Cassock. Sotana                <cell>Sotana
<row><cell lang=en>Roquet                         <cell>Roquete
<row><cell lang=en>The curtains                   <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a cortina
<row><cell lang=en>The hangings                   <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a colgadura
<row><cell lang=en>Sacristy                       <cell>Sacristía
<row><cell lang=en>Choir                          <cell>Coro
<row><cell lang=en>Baptismal-font                 <cell>Buñagan
<row><cell lang=en>Stoup                          <cell>Benditahan
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Lecturn>Lectern</corr>                        <cell>Facistol
<row><cell lang=en>Missal-stand                   <cell>Atril
<row><cell lang=en>Candlestick                    <cell>Candelero
<row><cell lang=en>Lustre                         <cell>Arañas
<row><cell lang=en>Missal                         <cell>Misal
<row><cell lang=en>Ritual                         <cell>Ritual
<row><cell lang=en>Standard                       <cell>Estandarte
<row><cell lang=en>Bier                           <cell>Lon&gtilde;on
</table>


<div1 id=s10>
<head>Ang balay.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>A house                        <cell>Usa ca balay
<row><cell lang=en>Stone-house                    <cell>Balay n&gtilde;a bato
<row><cell lang=en>Iron-house                     <cell>Balay n&gtilde;a puthao
<row><cell lang=en>Brick-house                    <cell>Balay n&gtilde;a ladrillo
<row><cell lang=en>Wooden-house                   <cell>Balay n&gtilde;a cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Wall                           <cell>Cota. Paril
<pb n=35 id=pb35><row><cell lang=en>Thin-wall                        <cell>Bongbong
<row><cell lang=en>A cottage                        <cell>Usa ca payag
<row><cell lang=en>Home                             <cell>Balay. Pinuyanan
<row><cell lang=en>Staircase                        <cell>Hagdan
<row><cell lang=en>A step                           <cell>Usa ca ang-ang
<row><cell lang=en>A room                           <cell>Usa ca cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>The parlor                       <cell>Ang salas
<row><cell lang=en>Sitting-room                     <cell>Descanso
<row><cell lang=en>Bedroom                          <cell>Cuarto n&gtilde;a pagahigdaan
<row><cell lang=en>Bath-room                        <cell>Caligoan
<row><cell lang=en>Dining-room                      <cell>Calan-an
<row><cell lang=en>Passage                          <cell>Corredor
<row><cell lang=en>Bridge                           <cell>Latayan
<row><cell lang=en>Hall                             <cell>Salón
<row><cell lang=en>Porch                            <cell>Silong
<row><cell lang=en>Kitchen                          <cell>Cocina
<row><cell lang=en>Chimney                          <cell>Alasohan
<row><cell lang=en>Hearth                           <cell>Dapog
<row><cell lang=en>Roof                             <cell>Atop
<row><cell lang=en>Zinc-roof                        <cell>Atop n&gtilde;a zinc
<row><cell lang=en>Tile-roof                        <cell>Atop n&gtilde;a tisa
<row><cell lang=en>Palm-roof                        <cell>Atop n&gtilde;a paod
<row><cell lang=en>Straw-roof                       <cell>Atop n&gtilde;a cogon
<row><cell lang=en>Lightning-rod                    <cell>Pararrayos
<row><cell lang=en>Ceiling                          <cell>Quízame
<row><cell lang=en>Floor                            <cell>Salug
<row><cell lang=en>Window                           <cell>Talamboan. Ventana
<row><cell lang=en>Door                             <cell>Pulta. Tacop
<row><cell lang=en>Street-door                      <cell>Tugcalan
<row><cell lang=en>Yard                             <cell>Sauang
<row><cell lang=en>Pantry                           <cell>Despensa
<pb n=36 id=pb36><row><cell lang=en>Cellar                   <cell>Pensa. Bodega
<row><cell lang=en>Coach-house              <cell>Cochera
<row><cell lang=en>Stable                   <cell>Caballeriza
<row><cell lang=en>Water closets            <cell>Caliban&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Laundry                  <cell>Bunac-an
<row><cell lang=en>Pigeon-house             <cell>Salampatihan
<row><cell lang=en>Fold                     <cell>Carnerohan
<row><cell lang=en>Poulterer                <cell>Manuc-an
<row><cell lang=en>Hog-sty                  <cell>Tangcal sa m&gtilde;a babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Cistern                  <cell>Algibe
</table>


<div1 id=s11>
<head>Ang casangcapan con ang m&gtilde;a galamiton sa balay.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Furniture                <cell>M&gtilde;a mueble
<row><cell lang=en>A table                  <cell>Usa ca lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>A round table            <cell>Usa ca velador
<row><cell lang=en>A console                <cell>Usa ca consola
<row><cell lang=en>A bench                  <cell>Usa ca langcape, banco
<row><cell lang=en>A chair                  <cell>Usa ca silla
<row><cell lang=en>Arm-chair                <cell>Butaca
<row><cell lang=en>Large-chair              <cell>Perezosa
<row><cell lang=en>Rocking-chair            <cell>Mecedora. Lia lia
<row><cell lang=en>A sofa                   <cell>Usa ca sofá
<row><cell lang=en>A lounge                 <cell>Usa ca canapé
<row><cell lang=en>A seat                   <cell>Usa ca lingcodanan
<row><cell lang=en>A cushion                <cell>Usa ca cojín
<row><cell lang=en>A mirror                 <cell>Usa ca salamín
<row><cell lang=en>A desk                   <cell>Usa ca sulatan
<row><cell lang=en>Writing desk             <cell>Sulatan
<row><cell lang=en>A picture                <cell>Usa ca cuadro
<pb n=37 id=pb37><row><cell lang=en>A portrait                   <cell>Usa ca retrato
<row><cell lang=en>A carpet                     <cell>Usa ca alfombra
<row><cell lang=en>A bed                        <cell>Usa ca higdaan
<row><cell lang=en>A cradle                     <cell>Usa ca duyang
<row><cell lang=en>A hammock                    <cell>Usa ca <corr sic=humaca>hamaca</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Washing-stand                <cell>Hunauan
<row><cell lang=en>A screen                     <cell>Usa ca biombo
<row><cell lang=en>A lamp                       <cell>Usa ca quinqué, lámpara
<row><cell lang=en>A lustre                     <cell>Usa ca araña
<row><cell lang=en>A chandelier                 <cell>Usa ca candelabro
<row><cell lang=en>A candlestick                <cell>Usa ca candelero
<row><cell lang=en>A shelf                      <cell>Usa ca estante
<row><cell lang=en>A book case                  <cell>Usa ca estante sa m&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>A dresser                    <cell>Usa ca aparador
<row><cell lang=en>A sideboard                  <cell>Usa ca alacena
<row><cell lang=en>A bureau                     <cell>Usa ca cómoda
<row><cell lang=en>A time piece                 <cell>Usa ca horasan
<row><cell lang=en>A clock                      <cell>Usa ca horasan
<row><cell lang=en>A piano                      <cell>Usa ca piano
<row><cell lang=en>A trunk                      <cell>Usa ca caban
<row><cell lang=en>A box                        <cell>Usa ca caja
<row><cell lang=en>Hat-stand                    <cell>Percha
<row><cell lang=en>Stick-stand                  <cell>Bastonera
<row><cell lang=en>Curtain                      <cell>Cortina
<row><cell lang=en>Cage                         <cell>Jaula
<row><cell lang=en>Flower-pot                   <cell>Macetero
<row><cell lang=en>Maize-mill                   <cell>Ligsanan
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Coffe-mill">Coffee-mill</corr>                   <cell>Ligsanan sa café
<row><cell lang=en>Loom                         <cell>Halablan
<row><cell lang=en>Distaff                      <cell>Galin&gtilde;an
<pb n=38 id=pb38><row><cell lang=en>A key                         <cell>Usa ca llave
<row><cell lang=en>A lock                        <cell>Usa ca llavihan
<row><cell lang=en>A padlock                     <cell>Usa ca candado
<row><cell lang=en>A broom                       <cell>Usa ca silhig
<row><cell lang=en>A feather-brush               <cell>Usa ca paspas
</table>


<div1 id=s12>
<head>M&gtilde;a panapton n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Satin                         <cell>Satín
<row><cell lang=en>Damask                        <cell>Damasco
<row><cell lang=en>Flax                          <cell>Hilo
<row><cell lang=en>Linen cloth                   <cell>Lienzo
<row><cell lang=en>Cambric                       <cell>Cambray. Batista
<row><cell lang=en>Silk                          <cell>Seda
<row><cell lang=en>Velvet                        <cell>Terciopelo
<row><cell lang=en>Gauze                         <cell>Gasa
<row><cell lang=en>Cotton                        <cell>Algodon. Lumpot
<row><cell lang=en>Wool                          <cell>Lana
<row><cell lang=en>Drill                         <cell>Dril
<row><cell lang=en>Calico                        <cell>Espartero. Coquillo
<row><cell lang=en>Blond lace                    <cell>Blonda
<row><cell lang=en>Cashmire                      <cell>Cachemira
<row><cell lang=en>Canvas                        <cell>Lona
<row><cell lang=en>Crape                         <cell>Crespon
<row><cell lang=en>Lace                          <cell>Encaje
<row><cell lang=en>Woollen cloth                 <cell>Paño
<row><cell lang=en>Flannel                       <cell>Franela
<row><cell lang=en>Merinos                       <cell>Merino
<row><cell lang=en>Muslin                        <cell>Muselina
<row><cell lang=en>Mohair                        <cell>Moaré
<row><cell lang=en>Cotton-cambric                <cell>Percal
<pb n=39 id=pb39><row><cell lang=en>Raso                         <cell>Satín. Raso
<row><cell lang=en>Condiman                     <cell>Condiman
<row><cell lang=en>Cloth                        <cell>Panapton
<row><cell lang=en>Stuffs                       <cell>Lain laing m&gtilde;a panapton
</table>


<div1 id=s13>
<head>M&gtilde;a visti.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Clothes                      <cell>Visti sa lalaque
<row><cell lang=en>Dresses                      <cell>Visti sa babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Hat                          <cell>Calo sa lalaque
<row><cell lang=en>Bonnet                       <cell>Calo sa babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Cap                          <cell>Gorro
<row><cell lang=en>Coat                         <cell>Chaqueta
<row><cell lang=en>Short jacket                 <cell>Americana
<row><cell lang=en>Frock coat                   <cell>Levita
<row><cell lang=en>Waistcoat. Vest              <cell>Chaleco
<row><cell lang=en>Trousers                     <cell>Pantalones. Calzones
<row><cell lang=en>Drawers                      <cell>Calzoncillos
<row><cell lang=en>Stockings                    <cell>Medias
<row><cell lang=en>Socks                        <cell>Calcetines
<row><cell lang=en>Shoes                        <cell>M&gtilde;a sapin
<row><cell lang=en>Boots                        <cell>Botas
<row><cell lang=en>Undershirt                   <cell>Camisin
<row><cell lang=en>Shirt                        <cell>Sinina sa lalaque
<row><cell lang=en>Shift                        <cell>Sinina sa babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Collar                       <cell>Cuello
<row><cell lang=en>Cuffs                        <cell>Puños
<row><cell lang=en>Cravat. Necktie              <cell>Corbata
<row><cell lang=en>Braces                       <cell>Tirantes
<row><cell lang=en>Kerchief                     <cell>Paño
<row><cell lang=en>Neckerchief                  <cell>Candonga
<row><cell lang=en>Handkerchief                 <cell>Pañuelo
<pb n=40 id=pb40><row><cell lang=en>Slippers                      <cell>Sinelas
<row><cell lang=en>Ladies&apos; boots                 <cell>Botines
<row><cell lang=en>Flannel shirt                 <cell>Sinina n&gtilde;a franela
<row><cell lang=en>Chinese shirt                 <cell>Camisa de chino
<row><cell lang=en>Piña shift                    <cell>Sinina n&gtilde;a piña
<row><cell lang=en>Silk shift                    <cell>Sinina n&gtilde;a seda
<row><cell lang=en>Chemise                       <cell>Camison
<row><cell lang=en>Jacket                        <cell>Camiseta
<row><cell lang=en>Skirt                         <cell>Saya
<row><cell lang=en>Petticoat                     <cell>Naguas. Enaguas
<row><cell lang=en>Corset                        <cell>Corsé
<row><cell lang=en>Waist                         <cell>Corpiño
<row><cell lang=en>Blouse                        <cell>Blusa
<row><cell lang=en>Shawl                         <cell>Chal
<row><cell lang=en>Mantle                        <cell>Mantilla
<row><cell lang=en>Veil                          <cell>Velo
<row><cell lang=en>Dressing gown                 <cell>Bata
<row><cell lang=en>Girdle                        <cell>Bacos. Cinturón
<row><cell lang=en>Belt                          <cell>Baat. Faja
<row><cell lang=en>Laze                          <cell>Lazo. Listón
<row><cell lang=en>Swadling                      <cell>M&gtilde;a hapin
<row><cell lang=en>Gloves                        <cell>M&gtilde;a guantes
<row><cell lang=en>Garters                       <cell>Ban&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Gaiters                       <cell>Polainas
<row><cell lang=en>A dress                       <cell>Usa ca visti
<row><cell lang=en>A costume                     <cell>Usa ca traje
<row><cell lang=en>A linen                       <cell>Usa ca ilisan
<row><cell lang=en>Lining                        <cell>Hanig. Sapao
<row><cell lang=en>Corsage                       <cell>Calauasan
<row><cell lang=en>Sleeves                       <cell>M&gtilde;a bocton
<row><cell lang=en>Pocket                        <cell>Bolsillo
</table>



<pb n=41 id=pb41>
<div1 id=s14>
<head>M&gtilde;a dayan dayan, m&gtilde;a hias, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Ring                          <cell>Singsing
<row><cell lang=en>Ear-rings                     <cell>Areos. Aretes
<row><cell lang=en>Necklace                      <cell>Collar. Cuentas
<row><cell lang=en>Pin                           <cell>Alfiler
<row><cell lang=en>Cravat-pin                    <cell>Alfiler sa corbata
<row><cell lang=en>Bonnet-pin                    <cell>Alfiler sa calo
<row><cell lang=en>Breast-pin                    <cell>Prendedor
<row><cell lang=en>Hair-pin                      <cell>Horquilla. Tranca
<row><cell lang=en>Bracelet                      <cell>Baclao. Brazalete
<row><cell lang=en>Bracelets                     <cell>Baluso. Pulseras
<row><cell lang=en>Brooch                        <cell>Gausing. Broche
<row><cell lang=en>Parasol                       <cell>Payong
<row><cell lang=en>Umbrella                      <cell>Payong
<row><cell lang=en>Comb                          <cell>Sudlay
<row><cell lang=en>Flat purse                    <cell>Portamonedas. Puntil
<row><cell lang=en>Jewels                        <cell>M&gtilde;a hias
<row><cell lang=en>Chain                         <cell>Cadena. Talicala
<row><cell lang=en>Fan                           <cell>Pay pay
<row><cell lang=en>Stick. Cane                   <cell>Songcod. Bastón
<row><cell lang=en>Watch                         <cell>Horasan
<row><cell lang=en>Spectacles                    <cell>Anteojos
<row><cell lang=en>Rosary                        <cell>Rosariohan
<row><cell lang=en>Prayer book                   <cell>Palan&gtilde;adyean
<row><cell lang=en>Wig                           <cell>Peluca
<row><cell lang=en>Plaiting                      <cell>Salapil
<row><cell lang=en>Embroidery                    <cell>Binoldahan
<row><cell lang=en>Knitting                      <cell>Gancillo
<row><cell lang=en>Buckle                        <cell>Hebilla
<pb n=42 id=pb42><row><cell lang=en>Medal                      <cell>Medalla
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Lacket>Locket</corr>                     <cell>Medallón
</table>


<div1 id=s15>
<head>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa pagcaon ug sa paginom.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Dining-table               <cell>Lamesa n&gtilde;a pagacan-an
<row><cell lang=en>Table-cloth                <cell>Manteles
<row><cell lang=en>Napkin                     <cell>Servilleta
<row><cell lang=en>Plate                      <cell>Pinggan
<row><cell lang=en>Dish                       <cell>Fuente
<row><cell lang=en>Salver                     <cell>Bandeja. Abandejado
<row><cell lang=en>A knife                    <cell>Usa ca cuchillo
<row><cell lang=en>A spoon                    <cell>Usa ca cuchara
<row><cell lang=en>A fork                     <cell>Usa ca tenedor
<row><cell lang=en>A glass                    <cell>Usa ca vaso
<row><cell lang=en>A bottle                   <cell>Usa ca botella
<row><cell lang=en>Wine-bottle<note n=1 lang=ceb>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a dili masayop ang tinonan sa iningles sa paggamit niining m&gtilde;a sustantivo n&gtilde;a guihin&gtilde;anlan compuesto. Lain man <hi lang=en>wine-bottle</hi>, lain <hi lang=en>bottle of wine</hi>; ang nahauna may cahologan <hi>botella n&gtilde;a pagasudlan ug vino</hi>, ug ang icaduha <hi>botella n&gtilde;a may vino</hi> cun <hi>napono sa vino</hi>. Ang nahauna guihubad co sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>botella sa vino</hi> ug ang icaduha <hi>botella n&gtilde;a vino</hi>. Guiin&gtilde;on co quini cay usahay nadun&gtilde;ug man <hi>botella sa vino</hi>, <hi>botella sa tubig</hi>, &amp;. ug masabut sa nagapamati <hi>botella n&gtilde;a may vino</hi>, <hi>botella n&gtilde;a may tubig</hi>, &amp;. ug dili gayud mao ang cahologan niadtong m&gtilde;a pagpamulong.</note>             <cell>Botella sa vino
<row><cell lang=en>Water-bottle               <cell>Botella sa tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Cruet                      <cell>Sudlanan sa suca
<row><cell lang=en>Pepper-box                 <cell>Sudlanan sa pimienta
<row><cell lang=en>Oil-bottle                 <cell>Lanahan
<row><cell lang=en>Teapot                     <cell>Sudlanan sa sha
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-pot                 <cell>Sudlanan sa café
<pb n=43 id=pb43><row><cell lang=en>Cup                             <cell>Taza. Copa
<row><cell lang=en>Chocolate-cup                   <cell>Escoria
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-cup                      <cell>Taza sa café
<row><cell lang=en>Tea-cup                         <cell>Taza sa sha
<row><cell lang=en>Liquor-cup                      <cell>Copa sa licor
<row><cell lang=en>Beer-cup                        <cell>Copa sa cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Wine-glass                      <cell>Vaso sa vino
<row><cell lang=en>Water-glass                     <cell>Vaso sa tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar-basin                     <cell>Sudlanan sa azucar
<row><cell lang=en>Salt-cellar                     <cell>Alasinan
<row><cell lang=en>Mustard-pot                     <cell>Sudlanan sa mostaza
<row><cell lang=en>Tray                            <cell>Bandeja
<row><cell lang=en>Bowl                            <cell>Ponchera
<row><cell lang=en>Soup-tureen                     <cell>Sopera
<row><cell lang=en>Cork-screw                      <cell>Tirabuzón
<row><cell lang=en>Filter                          <cell>Filtro
<row><cell lang=en>Cullender                       <cell>Salahan
<row><cell lang=en>Toothpick                       <cell>Hin&gtilde;iqui. Palito
</table>


<div1 id=s16>
<head>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa cocina.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Boiler                          <cell>Caldera
<row><cell lang=en>Caldron                         <cell>Caldero
<row><cell lang=en>Potlid                          <cell>Taclob
<row><cell lang=en>Skimmer                         <cell>Loag n&gtilde;a binohoan
<row><cell lang=en>Funnel                          <cell>Embudo
<row><cell lang=en>Gridiron                        <cell>Parrillas
<row><cell lang=en>Skewer                          <cell>Asalan
<row><cell lang=en>Pot                             <cell>Colong
<row><cell lang=en>Pestle                          <cell>Docdocan
<row><cell lang=en>Frying-pan                      <cell>Sarten. Calaha
<pb n=44 id=pb44><row><cell lang=en>Pan                           <cell>Cazuela
<row><cell lang=en>Jar                           <cell>Tadiao
<row><cell lang=en>Duster                        <cell>Noog
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-mill                   <cell>Molino sa café
<row><cell lang=en>Chopping-block                <cell>Tartaran
</table>


<div1 id=s17>
<head>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa cuarto n&gtilde;a pagahigda-an.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Bed                           <cell>Higda-an
<row><cell lang=en>Camp-bed                      <cell>Catre
<row><cell lang=en>Straw-bed                     <cell>Banig
<row><cell lang=en>Pillow                        <cell>Unlang
<row><cell lang=en>Sheet                         <cell>Habol n&gtilde;a coquillo
<row><cell lang=en>Blanket                       <cell>Habol
<row><cell lang=en>Spread. Quilt                 <cell>Colcha
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Matress>Mattress</corr>           <cell>Colchoneta
<row><cell lang=en>Mosquito-net                  <cell>Mosquitero
<row><cell lang=en>Pillow-case                   <cell>Funda
<row><cell lang=en>Night-table                   <cell>Lamesa de noche
<row><cell lang=en>Alarm-clock                   <cell>Despertador. Pulucaon
<row><cell lang=en>Candlestick                   <cell>Palmatoria
<row><cell lang=en>Matches                       <cell>Sacafuegos
<row><cell lang=en>Pot                           <cell>Orinola. Ihianan
<row><cell lang=en>Stool                         <cell>Taburete
<row><cell lang=en>Praying-desk                  <cell>Ludhanan
<row><cell lang=en>Carpet                        <cell>Alfombra
<row><cell lang=en>Shoe-horn                     <cell>Calzador
<row><cell lang=en>Waxlight                      <cell>Bujía
<row><cell lang=en>Lamp-shade                    <cell>Pantalla
<row><cell lang=en>Watch-pocket                  <cell>Relojera. Bulutan&gtilde;an sa horasan
</table>


<pb n=45 id=pb45>
<div1 id=s18>
<head>Ang panhunauan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Washing-stand                <cell>Hilamosan
<row><cell lang=en>Toilet                       <cell>Panhunauan
<row><cell lang=en>Basin                        <cell>Hunauan
<row><cell lang=en>Pitcher                      <cell>Pichel
<row><cell lang=en>Looking-glass                <cell>Salamin
<row><cell lang=en>Towel                        <cell>Pamahiran
<row><cell lang=en>Soap                         <cell>Sabon
<row><cell lang=en>Comb                         <cell>Sudlay
<row><cell lang=en>Scissors                     <cell>Gunting
<row><cell lang=en>Brush                        <cell>Cepillo
<row><cell lang=en>Tooth-brush                  <cell>Cepillo sa n&gtilde;ipon
<row><cell lang=en>Cloth-brush                  <cell>Cepillo sa visti
<row><cell lang=en>Hair-brush                   <cell>Cepillo sa buhoc
<row><cell lang=en>Hat-brush                    <cell>Cepillo sa calo
<row><cell lang=en>Nail-brush                   <cell>Cepillo sa coco
<row><cell lang=en>Powder                       <cell>Polvos. Binocboc n&gtilde;a mahomot
<row><cell lang=en>Razor                        <cell>Navaja sa pagalot
<row><cell lang=en>Brush                        <cell>Brocha
<row><cell lang=en>Hat-box                      <cell>Sudlanan sa calo
<row><cell lang=en>Glove-box                    <cell>Sudlanan sa guantes
<row><cell lang=en>Powder-box                   <cell>Sudlanan sa binocboc
<row><cell lang=en>Blacking                     <cell>Betún
<row><cell lang=en>Cosmetics                    <cell>Cosmético
<row><cell lang=en>Rice-powder                  <cell>Binocboc sa bugas
<row><cell lang=en>Finger-file                  <cell>Limbas sa m&gtilde;a coco
<row><cell lang=en>Jewel-box                    <cell>Estuche. Sudlanan sa hias
</table>


<pb n=46 id=pb46>
<div1 id=s19>
<head>Ang sulatan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Desk                         <cell>Sulatan
<row><cell lang=en>Books                        <cell>M&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>Copy-book                    <cell>Cuaderno
<row><cell lang=en>Paper                        <cell>Papel
<row><cell lang=en>A sheet                      <cell>Usa ca pliego
<row><cell lang=en>A quire                      <cell>Usa ca cuadernillo
<row><cell lang=en>A ream                       <cell>Usa ca resma
<row><cell lang=en>Pocket-book                  <cell>Cartera
<row><cell lang=en>The pen                      <cell>Ang pluma
<row><cell lang=en>The pencil                   <cell>Ang lapis
<row><cell lang=en>The penholder                <cell>Ang mango
<row><cell lang=en>The pen-knife                <cell>Ang cortaplumas
<row><cell lang=en>The ink                      <cell>Ang tinta
<row><cell lang=en>The inkstand                 <cell>Ang tintero
<row><cell lang=en>The ruler                    <cell>Ang regla
<row><cell lang=en>The wafers                   <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a oblea
<row><cell lang=en>Sealing-wax                  <cell>Lacre
<row><cell lang=en>Bell                         <cell>Campanilla
<row><cell lang=en>Envelope                     <cell>Sobre
<row><cell lang=en>Note-paper                   <cell>Papel sa m&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>Stamp                        <cell>Sello sa correo
<row><cell lang=en>Seal                         <cell>Patic
<row><cell lang=en>Slate                        <cell>Pizarra
<row><cell lang=en>Rubber                       <cell>Iquilias. Borrador
<row><cell lang=en>Blotting-paper               <cell>Papel secante
<row><cell lang=en>Sand-box                     <cell>Salvadera
<row><cell lang=en>A card                       <cell>Usa ca tarjeta
<row><cell lang=en>A billet                     <cell>Usa ca billete
<row><cell lang=en>A letter                     <cell>Usa ca sulat
</table>


<pb n=47 id=pb47>
<div1 id=s20>
<head>Ang capandayan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Chisel                        <cell>Tiguib
<row><cell lang=en>The plumb                     <cell>Ang tonton
<row><cell lang=en>The square                    <cell>Ang escuala
<row><cell lang=en>The level                     <cell>Ang nivel
<row><cell lang=en>The saw                       <cell>Ang gabas
<row><cell lang=en>The plane                     <cell>Ang cepilla, catam
<row><cell lang=en>The mallet                    <cell>Ang pacang
<row><cell lang=en>The hammer                    <cell>Ang bacbac
<row><cell lang=en>The auger                     <cell>Ang barrena
<row><cell lang=en>Bit-stock                     <cell>Adlong. Taladro
<row><cell lang=en>Gimlet                        <cell>Barreno n&gtilde;a diotay
<row><cell lang=en>Nippers                       <cell>Quimpit
<row><cell lang=en>Ruler                         <cell>Regla
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Wrenck>Wrench</corr>                        <cell>Birador. Destornillador
<row><cell lang=en>Adze                          <cell>Bingcong
<row><cell lang=en>Compass                       <cell>Compas
<row><cell lang=en>Burin                         <cell>Buril
<row><cell lang=en>Pliers                        <cell>Alicates
<row><cell lang=en>Axe                           <cell>Oasay. Palacol
<row><cell lang=en>Vice                          <cell>Tornillo
<row><cell lang=en>Lathe                         <cell>Ladican
<row><cell lang=en>File                          <cell>Limbas
<row><cell lang=en>A nail                        <cell>Usa ca lansang
<row><cell lang=en>A wedge                       <cell>Usa ca badyit
</table>



<pb n=48 id=pb48>
<div1 id=s21>
<head>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa mananalot.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Razors                           <cell>M&gtilde;a navaja
<row><cell lang=en>Shears                           <cell>Gunting
<row><cell lang=en>Comb                             <cell>Sudlay
<row><cell lang=en>Soap                             <cell>Sabon
<row><cell lang=en>Razor-strop                      <cell>Baylan
<row><cell lang=en>Brush                            <cell>Brocha
<row><cell lang=en>Oil                              <cell>Lana
<row><cell lang=en>Cosmetic                         <cell>Cosmético
<row><cell lang=en>Pomade                           <cell>Pomada
<row><cell lang=en>Powder                           <cell>Polvos
<row><cell lang=en>Hair-brush                       <cell>Cepillo sa buhoc
<row><cell lang=en>Towel                            <cell>Pamahidan
<row><cell lang=en>Basin                            <cell>Hunauan
<row><cell lang=en>Mirror                           <cell>Salamin
</table>


<div1 id=s22>
<head>Capandayan sa magbobohat ug sapin.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Awl                              <cell>Hilihod
<row><cell lang=en>Hammer                           <cell>Bacbac
<row><cell lang=en>Nail                             <cell>Lansang
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Last>Cast</corr>                     <cell>Holma
<row><cell lang=en>Shears                           <cell>Gunting
<row><cell lang=en>Knife                            <cell>Cuchilla
<row><cell lang=en>Peg                              <cell>Tunuc
<row><cell lang=en>Pitch                            <cell>Salong
<row><cell lang=en>Wax                              <cell>Talo
<row><cell lang=en>Tallow                           <cell>Sebo
<row><cell lang=en>Leather                          <cell>Panit
<row><cell lang=en>Varnished leather                <cell>Charol
</table>


<pb n=49 id=pb49>
<div1 id=s23>
<head>M&gtilde;a bahin sa horasan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Hour-hand                     <cell>Mano
<row><cell lang=en>Minute-hand                   <cell>Minutero
<row><cell lang=en>Second-hand                   <cell>Segundero
<row><cell lang=en>Main-spring                   <cell>Muelle
<row><cell lang=en>Hair-spring                   <cell>Buhoc
<row><cell lang=en>Watch-spring                  <cell>Cuerda
<row><cell lang=en>Sphere                        <cell>Esfera
<row><cell lang=en>Anchor                        <cell>Ancora
<row><cell lang=en>Wheel                         <cell>Ligid
<row><cell lang=en>Register                      <cell>Registro
<row><cell lang=en>Pendulum                      <cell>Péndula
<row><cell lang=en>Key                           <cell>Llave
<row><cell lang=en>Chain                         <cell>Cadena
<row><cell lang=en>Case                          <cell>Caja
</table>


<div1 id=s24>
<head>Guarniciones, silla, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Reins                         <cell>Riendas
<row><cell lang=en>Bit                           <cell>Bocado
<row><cell lang=en>Headstall                     <cell>Cabezada
<row><cell lang=en>Whip                          <cell>Fusta. Bonal
<row><cell lang=en>Stirrups                      <cell>Estribos
<row><cell lang=en>Halter                        <cell>Hocot
<row><cell lang=en>Saddle                        <cell>Silla
<row><cell lang=en>Girths                        <cell>Cincha
<row><cell lang=en>Harness                       <cell>Guarniciones
<row><cell lang=en>Collar                        <cell>Collera
<row><cell lang=en>Bridle                        <cell>Freno
<pb n=50 id=pb50><row><cell lang=en>Spurs                           <cell>Espuelas
<row><cell lang=en>Horse-shoe                      <cell>Herradura
</table>


<div1 id=s25>
<head>M&gtilde;a armas, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Fire-arms                       <cell>M&gtilde;a luthanan
<row><cell lang=en>Side-arms                       <cell>M&gtilde;a hin&gtilde;aniban
<row><cell lang=en>Gun                             <cell>Fusil
<row><cell lang=en>Cannon                          <cell>Luthanan. Cañón
<row><cell lang=en>Revolver                        <cell>Revolver
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Morter>Mortar</corr>                          <cell>Mortero
<row><cell lang=en>Grenade                         <cell>Granada
<row><cell lang=en>Ball                            <cell>Bala
<row><cell lang=en>Cartouch                        <cell>Cartucho
<row><cell lang=en>Cartridge-box                   <cell>Cartuchera
<row><cell lang=en>Powder                          <cell>Pólvora
<row><cell lang=en>Castle                          <cell>Castillo
<row><cell lang=en>Redoubt                         <cell>Reducto
<row><cell lang=en>Tower                           <cell>Cota. Baluarte
<row><cell lang=en>Spear                           <cell>Bangcao
<row><cell lang=en>Shield                          <cell>Calasag
<row><cell lang=en>Arrow                           <cell>Pana
<row><cell lang=en>Bow                             <cell>Bosog
<row><cell lang=en>Saber                           <cell>Sable
<row><cell lang=en>Sword                           <cell>Espada
<row><cell lang=en>Bolo                            <cell>Sungdang
<row><cell lang=en>Poniard                         <cell>Baladao
<row><cell lang=en>Cris                            <cell>Calis
<row><cell lang=en>Cutlass                         <cell>Campilang
<row><cell lang=en>Army                            <cell>Ejército
<row><cell lang=en>Artillery                       <cell>Artillería
<pb n=51 id=pb51><row><cell lang=en>Infantry                       <cell>Infantería
<row><cell lang=en>Cavalry                        <cell>Caballería
<row><cell lang=en>Ambulance                      <cell>Ambulancia
<row><cell lang=en>Navy                           <cell>Armada
</table>


<div1 id=s26>
<head>Ang música.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Music                          <cell>Música
<row><cell lang=en>A musician                     <cell>Usa ca músico
<row><cell lang=en>A singer                       <cell>Usa ca cantor
<row><cell lang=en>Tenor                          <cell>Tenor
<row><cell lang=en>Contralto                      <cell>Contralto
<row><cell lang=en>Treble                         <cell>Tiple
<row><cell lang=en>Bass                           <cell>Bajo
<row><cell lang=en>To sing                        <cell>Pagcanta
<row><cell lang=en>To play the guitar             <cell>Pagcoscos sa sesta
<row><cell lang=en>To play the piano              <cell>Pagpiano
<row><cell lang=en>To play on                     <cell>Pagtocar. Pagpatin&gtilde;ug
<row><cell lang=en>Piano                          <cell>Piano
<row><cell lang=en>Organ                          <cell>Organo
<row><cell lang=en>Harmonium                      <cell>Harmonium
<row><cell lang=en>Harp                           <cell>Harpa
<row><cell lang=en>Flute                          <cell>Flauta
<row><cell lang=en>Clarionet                      <cell>Clarinete
<row><cell lang=en>Bugle                          <cell>Clarin
<row><cell lang=en>Trumpet                        <cell>Trompeta
<row><cell lang=en>Trombone                       <cell>Trombon
<row><cell lang=en>Hautboy                        <cell>Oboe
<row><cell lang=en>Horn                           <cell>Trompa
<row><cell lang=en>Cornet                         <cell>Corneta
<row><cell lang=en>Pipe                           <cell>Flautin
<pb n=52 id=pb52><row><cell lang=en>Baritone                       <cell>Barítono
<row><cell lang=en>Lyre                           <cell>Lira
<row><cell lang=en>Bassoon                        <cell>Bajón
<row><cell lang=en>Violin                         <cell>Violin
<row><cell lang=en>Violoncello                    <cell>Violoncello
<row><cell lang=en>Viol                           <cell>Viola
<row><cell lang=en>Violone                        <cell>Contrabajo
<row><cell lang=en>Bandore                        <cell>Bandurria
<row><cell lang=en>Guitar                         <cell>Sesta
<row><cell lang=en>Accordion                      <cell>Acordion
<row><cell lang=en>Drum                           <cell>Tambor
<row><cell lang=en>Large drum                     <cell>Bombo
<row><cell lang=en>Kettle drum                    <cell>Timbal
<row><cell lang=en>Tambourine                     <cell>Pandero
<row><cell lang=en>Whole note                     <cell>Redonda
<row><cell lang=en>Half note                      <cell>Blanca
<row><cell lang=en>Crotchet                       <cell>Negra
<row><cell lang=en>Dotted note                    <cell>Punto
<row><cell lang=en>Quaver                         <cell>Corchea
<row><cell lang=en>Semiquaver                     <cell>Semicorchea
<row><cell lang=en>Demi semiquaver                <cell>Fusa
<row><cell lang=en>Double demi semiquaver         <cell>Semifusa
<row><cell lang=en>Clef                           <cell>Clave
<row><cell lang=en>G Clef                         <cell>Clave de sol
<row><cell lang=en>F Clef                         <cell>Clave de fa
<row><cell lang=en>C Clef                         <cell>Clave de do
<row><cell lang=en>Sharp                          <cell>Sostenido
<row><cell lang=en>Flat                           <cell>Bemol
<row><cell lang=en>Natural                        <cell>Becuadro
<row><cell lang=en>Tie                            <cell>Ligadura
<row><cell lang=en>Rest                           <cell>Silencio
<pb n=53 id=pb53><row><cell lang=en>Pause                           <cell>Calderón
<row><cell lang=en>Key                             <cell>Tecla
<row><cell lang=en>String                          <cell>Cuerda
<row><cell lang=en>Bow                             <cell>Arco
<row><cell lang=en>Bridge                          <cell>Puente
<row><cell lang=en>Fret                            <cell>Bidya
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Orchesta>Orchestra</corr>                        <cell>Orquesta
<row><cell lang=en>Band                            <cell>Banda
</table>


<div1 id=s27>
<head>M&gtilde;a dula-an, m&gtilde;a calilin&gtilde;auan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Billiards                       <cell>Billar
<row><cell lang=en>Chess                           <cell>Ajedrez
<row><cell lang=en>Dice                            <cell>Dados
<row><cell lang=en>Dominos                         <cell>Dominó
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Loto>Lotto</corr>                            <cell>Lotería
<row><cell lang=en>Draughts                        <cell>Damas
<row><cell lang=en>Cards                           <cell>Baraja. Cartas
<row><cell lang=en>Theatre                         <cell>Teatro
<row><cell lang=en>Ball                            <cell>Baile. Sayauan
<row><cell lang=en>Dance                           <cell>Pagsayao
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Gymnatics>Gymnastics</corr>                       <cell>Gimnasia
<row><cell lang=en>Swing                           <cell>Abiogan
<row><cell lang=en>Fencing                         <cell>Esgrima
<row><cell lang=en>Walking                         <cell>Pagsodoy sodoy
<row><cell lang=en>Riding                          <cell>Pagcabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Driving                         <cell>Pagcarruage
<row><cell lang=en>Fishing                         <cell>Pagpanagat
<row><cell lang=en>Swimming                        <cell>Pagcalan&gtilde;oy
<row><cell lang=en>Running                         <cell>Pagdalagan
<row><cell lang=en>To dance                        <cell>Pagsayao
<pb n=54 id=pb54><row><cell lang=en>To swing                     <cell>Pagduyan duyan
<row><cell lang=en>Top                          <cell>Casing
<row><cell lang=en>Kite                         <cell>Talabanoc
<row><cell lang=en>Races                        <cell>Carreras
<row><cell lang=en>Carriage. Coach              <cell>Carruage
<row><cell lang=en>Bicycle                      <cell>Bicicleta
<row><cell lang=en>To play at billiards         <cell>Pagdula sa billar
<row><cell lang=en>To play at cards             <cell>Pagbaraja
<row><cell lang=en>To play at ball              <cell>Pagdula sa pelota. Pagsipa
<row><cell lang=en>To play at dominos           <cell>Pagdominó
<row><cell lang=en>To play at chess             <cell>Pagajedrez
</table>


<div1 id=s28>
<head>Ang pagcaon.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>To eat                       <cell>Pagcaon
<row><cell lang=en>Dining-room                  <cell>Canan-an
<row><cell lang=en>To breakfast                 <cell>Pagpainit
<row><cell lang=en>Breakfast                    <cell>Painit
<row><cell lang=en>To lunch                     <cell>Pagpamahao
<row><cell lang=en>Lunch                        <cell>Pamahao
<row><cell lang=en>To dine                      <cell>Pagpaniodto
<row><cell lang=en>Dinner                       <cell>Paniodto
<row><cell lang=en>To sup                       <cell>Pagpanihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Supper                       <cell>Panihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Meal                         <cell>Calanon
<row><cell lang=en>Feast                        <cell>Convida. Convite
<row><cell lang=en>Vinegar                      <cell>Suca
<row><cell lang=en>Oil                          <cell>Lana
<row><cell lang=en>Salt                         <cell>Asin
<row><cell lang=en>Pepper                       <cell>Malisa
<pb n=55 id=pb55><row><cell lang=en>Mustard                        <cell>Mostaza
<row><cell lang=en>Spices                         <cell>Panacot
<row><cell lang=en>Cinnamon                       <cell>Mana
<row><cell lang=en>Sauce                          <cell>Salsa
<row><cell lang=en>Bread                          <cell>Pan
<row><cell lang=en>Butter                         <cell>Mantequilla
<row><cell lang=en>Lard                           <cell>Manteca
<row><cell lang=en>Fat                            <cell>Tambuc
<row><cell lang=en>Meat                           <cell>Carne. Onod
<row><cell lang=en>Fresh meat                     <cell>Onod n&gtilde;a lab-as
<row><cell lang=en>Cold meat                      <cell>Onod n&gtilde;a inasinan
<row><cell lang=en>Jerked meat                    <cell>Tapa
<row><cell lang=en>Soup                           <cell>Sopa
<row><cell lang=en>Milk soup                      <cell>Sopa n&gtilde;a gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Vermicelly soup                <cell>Sopa n&gtilde;a fideos
<row><cell lang=en>Macaroni soup                  <cell>Sopa n&gtilde;a macarrones
<row><cell lang=en>Bread soup                     <cell>Sopa n&gtilde;a pan
<row><cell lang=en>Rice soup                      <cell>Sopa n&gtilde;a bugas
<row><cell lang=en>Broth                          <cell>Sabao
<row><cell lang=en>Boiled meat                    <cell>Onod n&gtilde;a linatan
<row><cell lang=en>Pottage                        <cell>Potage
<row><cell lang=en>Vegetables                     <cell>Olotanon
<row><cell lang=en>Ham                            <cell>Jamon
<row><cell lang=en>Beef                           <cell>Onod sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Mutton                         <cell>Onod sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Veal                           <cell>Onod sa vacang dumalaga
<row><cell lang=en>Pork                           <cell>Onod sa babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Venison                        <cell>Onod sa usa
<row><cell lang=en>Lamb                           <cell>Onod sa nating carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Kid                            <cell>Onod sa itoyng canding
<pb n=56 id=pb56><row><cell lang=en>Chicken                          <cell>Piso <!-- Actually Chick, Chicken is Manok -->
<row><cell lang=en>Duck                             <cell>Itic
<row><cell lang=en>Goose                            <cell>Gaquet
<row><cell lang=en>Rabbit                           <cell>Conejo
<row><cell lang=en>Dove                             <cell>Salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Pigeon                           <cell>Cuyabog sa salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Turkey                           <cell>Pavo
<row><cell lang=en>Fish                             <cell>Isda
<row><cell lang=en>Salt-fish                        <cell>Isda n&gtilde;a binulad
<row><cell lang=en>Brine-fish                       <cell>Guinamus
<row><cell lang=en>Cod-fish                         <cell>Bacalao
<row><cell lang=en>Oyster                           <cell>Talaba
<row><cell lang=en>Sardines                         <cell>Tangban
<row><cell lang=en>Lobster                          <cell>Banagan
<row><cell lang=en>Craw-fish                        <cell>Aliman&gtilde;o
<row><cell lang=en>Potatoes                         <cell>Patatas
<row><cell lang=en>Peas                             <cell>Guisantes
<row><cell lang=en>Spanish peas                     <cell>Garbanzos
<row><cell lang=en>Beans                            <cell>Aluvias
<row><cell lang=en>Cabbage                          <cell>Coles
<row><cell lang=en>Eggs                             <cell>M&gtilde;a itlog
<row><cell lang=en>Poached eggs                     <cell>Estrellados
<row><cell lang=en>Omelet                           <cell>Tortillas
<row><cell lang=en>Salad                            <cell>Quinilao
<row><cell lang=en>Cutlet                           <cell>Chuleta sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Beef-steak                       <cell><!-- Missing in source -->
<row><cell lang=en>Roast-beef                       <cell><!-- Missing in source -->
<row><cell lang=en>Fillet of beef                   <cell>Hiua sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Fricasse                         <cell>Pepitoria
<row><cell lang=en>Loin                             <cell>Boco boco
<row><cell lang=en>Sirloin                          <cell>Boco boco sa vaca
<pb n=57 id=pb57><row><cell lang=en>Kidneys                          <cell>Amimislong
<row><cell lang=en>Heart                            <cell>Casing casing
<row><cell lang=en>Brain                            <cell>Otoc
<row><cell lang=en>Head                             <cell>Olo
<row><cell lang=en>Tongue                           <cell>Dila
<row><cell lang=en>Liver                            <cell>Atay
<row><cell lang=en>Blood                            <cell>Dugo
<row><cell lang=en>Neck                             <cell>Liog
<row><cell lang=en>Leg                              <cell>Pa-a
<row><cell lang=en>Dessert                          <cell>Postre
<row><cell lang=en>Cheese                           <cell>Queso
<row><cell lang=en>Mango                            <cell>Manga
<row><cell lang=en>Banana                           <cell>Saguing
<row><cell lang=en>Pine-apple                       <cell>Piña
<row><cell lang=en>Pears                            <cell>Peras
<row><cell lang=en>Oranges                          <cell>Ucban
<row><cell lang=en>Raisins                          <cell>Pasas
<row><cell lang=en>Grapes                           <cell>Uvas. Paras
<row><cell lang=en>Apples                           <cell>Manzanas
<row><cell lang=en>Dates                            <cell>Dátiles
<row><cell lang=en>Pomegranate                      <cell>Granada
<row><cell lang=en>Sweetmeats                       <cell>Matamis
<row><cell lang=en>Pudding                          <cell>Pudin
<row><cell lang=en>Custard                          <cell>Natillas
<row><cell lang=en>Pies                             <cell>Pasteles
</table>


<div1 id=s29>
<head>Ang paginom.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>To drink                         <cell>Paginom
<row><cell lang=en>Drinking                         <cell>Ilimnon
<row><cell lang=en>Water                            <cell>Tubig
<pb n=58 id=pb58><row><cell lang=en>Wine                              <cell>Vino
<row><cell lang=en>Palm-wine                         <cell>Tuba
<row><cell lang=en>Beer                              <cell>Cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Stout                             <cell>Cerveza n&gtilde;a maitum
<row><cell lang=en>Liquors                           <cell>M&gtilde;a licor
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Cooffee>Coffee</corr>                           <cell>Café
<row><cell lang=en>Tea                               <cell>Sha
<row><cell lang=en>Chocolate                         <cell>Chocolate
<row><cell lang=en>Milk                              <cell>Gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Broth                             <cell>Sabao
<row><cell lang=en>Claret                            <cell>Burdeos
<row><cell lang=en>Cider                             <cell>Sidra
<row><cell lang=en>Burgundy                          <cell>Borgoña
<row><cell lang=en>Port wine                         <cell>Oporto
<row><cell lang=en>Madera                            <cell>Madeira
<row><cell lang=en>Champagne                         <cell>Champan
<row><cell lang=en>Gin                               <cell>Ginebra
<row><cell lang=en>Sherry                            <cell>Jerez
<row><cell lang=en>Brandy                            <cell>Aguardiente
<row><cell lang=en>Whisky                            <cell>Whisky
<row><cell lang=en>Malmsey                           <cell>Malvasia
<row><cell lang=en>Cognac                            <cell>Coñac
<row><cell lang=en>Rum                               <cell>Rom
<row><cell lang=en>Nipa wine                         <cell>Tanduay
<row><cell lang=en>Glass of water                    <cell>Vaso n&gtilde;a tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Glass of wine                     <cell>Vaso n&gtilde;a vino
<row><cell lang=en>Glass of milk                     <cell>Vaso n&gtilde;a gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of beer                       <cell>Copa n&gtilde;a cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of liquor                     <cell>Copa n&gtilde;a licor
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of broth                      <cell>Taza n&gtilde;a sabao
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of coffee                     <cell>Taza n&gtilde;a café
<pb n=59 id=pb59><row><cell lang=en>Cup of tea                        <cell>Taza n&gtilde;a sha
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of chocolate                  <cell>Escoria n&gtilde;a chocolate
<row><cell lang=en>Cup of <corr sic=camomile>chamomile</corr>                   <cell>Taza n&gtilde;a manzanilla
<row><cell lang=en>Punch                             <cell>Ponche
<row><cell lang=en>Ice cream                         <cell>Sorbete
<row><cell lang=en>Lemonade                          <cell>Limonada
<row><cell lang=en>Almond water                      <cell>Orchata
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee and milk                   <cell>Café n&gtilde;a sinactan ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Wine and water                    <cell>Vino n&gtilde;a sinactan ug tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Water and sugar                   <cell>Tubig n&gtilde;a matamis
<row><cell lang=en>Syrup                             <cell>Almibar
</table>


<div1 id=s30>
<head>Ang Religión.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>God                               <cell>Ang Dios
<row><cell lang=en>Creator                           <cell>Magbubuhat
<row><cell lang=en>Almighty                          <cell>Macagagahom
<row><cell lang=en>The holy Trinity                  <cell>Ang santos uyamut n&gtilde;a Trinidad
<row><cell lang=en>The eternal Father                <cell>Ang Amahan n&gtilde;a ualay catapusan
<row><cell lang=en>The Son of God                    <cell>Ang Anac sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>The Holy Ghost                    <cell>Ang Espíritu Santo
<row><cell lang=en>Jesus Christ                      <cell>Si Jesucristo
<row><cell lang=en>The Lord                          <cell>Ang Guinoo
<row><cell lang=en>Redeemer                          <cell>Manonobos
<row><cell lang=en>Saviour                           <cell>Mamamauy
<row><cell lang=en>The holy Church                   <cell>Ang Santa Iglesia
<row><cell lang=en>Sacrament                         <cell>Sacramento
<pb n=60 id=pb60><row><cell lang=en>Baptism                       <cell>Ang Pagbuñag
<row><cell lang=en>Confirmation                  <cell>Ang Pagcompilma
<row><cell lang=en>Holy Eucharist                <cell>Ang Eucaristía
<row><cell lang=en>The Communion                 <cell>Ang Pagcalauat
<row><cell lang=en>Penance                       <cell>Ang Penitencia
<row><cell lang=en>Extreme unction               <cell>Ang Pagbadlis
<row><cell lang=en>Holy Order                    <cell>Ang Pagorden
<row><cell lang=en>Matrimony                     <cell>Ang Pagcasal
<row><cell lang=en>The mass                      <cell>Ang misa
<row><cell lang=en>Low mass                      <cell>Misa rezada
<row><cell lang=en>High mass                     <cell>Misa cantada <hi>cun</hi> mayor
<row><cell lang=en>The holy Gospel               <cell>Ang santos n&gtilde;a Evangelio
<row><cell lang=en>The Bible                     <cell>Ang Biblia
<row><cell lang=en>The holy scripture            <cell>Ang santos n&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>The Holy Virgin               <cell>Ang mahal n&gtilde;a Virgen
<row><cell lang=en>An angel                      <cell>Usa ca angel
<row><cell lang=en>A saint                       <cell>Usa ca santos
<row><cell lang=en>A just                        <cell>Usa ca matarung
<row><cell lang=en>Heaven                        <cell>Ang lan&gtilde;it
<row><cell lang=en>Glory                         <cell>Himaya sa lan&gtilde;it
<row><cell lang=en>Hell                          <cell>Infierno
<row><cell lang=en>Purgatory                     <cell>Ang purgatario
<row><cell lang=en>Judgment of last day          <cell>Adlao sa pagpanudia
<row><cell lang=en>To fast                       <cell>Pagpuasa
<row><cell lang=en>Day of fasting                <cell>Adlao n&gtilde;a igapuasa
<row><cell lang=en>Day of working                <cell>Adlao n&gtilde;a igatrabajo
<row><cell lang=en>The Lent                      <cell>Ang cuaresma
<row><cell lang=en>Carnival                      <cell>Bilin bilin
<row><cell lang=en>Ash Wednesday                 <cell>Ang badlis
<row><cell lang=en>Holy Week                     <cell>Semana Santa
<pb n=61 id=pb61><row><cell lang=en>Palm Sunday                      <cell>Domingo sa lucay
<row><cell lang=en>Good Thursday                    <cell>Jueves Santo
<row><cell lang=en>Good Friday                      <cell>Viernes Santo
<row><cell lang=en>Nativity of Christ               <cell>Pagcatao ni Jesucristo
<row><cell lang=en>Christmas                        <cell>Pasco sa Pagcatao
<row><cell lang=en>Epiphany                         <cell>Fiesta sa tolo ca hari
<row><cell lang=en>Resurrection of Christ           <cell>Pagcabanhao ni Jesucristo
<row><cell lang=en>Easter                           <cell>Pasco sa Pagcabanhao
<row><cell lang=en>Ascension                        <cell>Pagsaca sa lan&gtilde;it
<row><cell lang=en>Pentecost                        <cell>Ang pagcunsad sa Espíritu Santo
<row><cell lang=en>Whitsuntide                      <cell>Pasco sa Espíritu Santo
<row><cell lang=en>Corpus <corr sic=Christ>Christi</corr> day                <cell>Corpus
<row><cell lang=en>Nativity of blessed Mary         <cell>Ang Pagcatao sa mahal n&gtilde;a Virgen
<row><cell lang=en>Candlemas                        <cell>Candelaria
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Anunciation>Annunciation</corr> of Virgin Mary       <cell>Ang pagcunsad ni San Gabriel
<row><cell lang=en>Assumption                       <cell>Asuncion
<row><cell lang=en>Conception                       <cell>Concepcion
<row><cell lang=en>All Saints&apos; day                  <cell>Fiesta sa n&gtilde;atanan m&gtilde;a Santos
<row><cell lang=en>All souls&apos; day                   <cell>Adlao sa m&gtilde;a minatay
<row><cell lang=en>Feast                            <cell>Fiesta n&gtilde;a ililihi
<row><cell lang=en>Advent                           <cell>Adviento
<row><cell lang=en>The Religion                     <cell>Ang Religión
<row><cell lang=en>Catholic Religion                <cell>Ang Religión Católica
<row><cell lang=en>Protestantism                    <cell>Ang protestantismo
<row><cell lang=en>A christian                      <cell>Usa ca cristianos
<row><cell lang=en>A catholic                       <cell>Usa ca católico
<pb n=62 id=pb62><row><cell lang=en>A protestant                  <cell>Usa ca protestante
<row><cell lang=en>A jew                         <cell>Usa ca judios
<row><cell lang=en>An idolater                   <cell>Usa ca diuatahan
<row><cell lang=en>A presbyterian                <cell>Usa ca presbiteriano
<row><cell lang=en>A methodist                   <cell>Usa ca metodista
<row><cell lang=en>A calvinist                   <cell>Usa ca calvinista
<row><cell lang=en>A lutheran                    <cell>Usa ca luterano
<row><cell lang=en>A heretic                     <cell>Usa ca herejes
<row><cell lang=en>A schismatic                  <cell>Usa ca cismático
<row><cell lang=en>The devil                     <cell>Ang yaua
<row><cell lang=en>The sorcerer                  <cell>Ang balbal
<row><cell lang=en>The phantom                   <cell>Ang abat
<row><cell lang=en>The souls                     <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a calag
<row><cell lang=en>The eternal life              <cell>Ang quinabuhi n&gtilde;a ualay catapusan
<row><cell lang=en>The everlasting life          <cell>Ang quinabuhi n&gtilde;a dayon
<row><cell lang=en>Anniversary                   <cell>Sumad
<row><cell lang=en>Holiday                       <cell>Adlao sa fiesta
<row><cell lang=en>New-year&apos;s day                <cell>Adlao sa bag-ong tuig <hi>cun</hi> Año nuevo
<row><cell lang=en>National holiday              <cell>Fiesta sa guinharian
<row><cell lang=en>Thanksgiving-day              <cell>Fiesta sa pagpasalamat
</table>


<div1 id=s31>
<head>M&gtilde;a quinaadman, m&gtilde;a arte, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Grammar                       <cell>Gramática
<row><cell lang=en>Poetry                        <cell>Poética
<row><cell lang=en>Geography                     <cell>Geografía
<row><cell lang=en>Mathematics                   <cell>Matemáticas
<row><cell lang=en>Arithmetic                    <cell>Aritmética
<row><cell lang=en>Algebra                       <cell>Algebra
<pb n=63 id=pb63><row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Ceometry>Geometry</corr>                        <cell>Geometría
<row><cell lang=en>Trigonometry                    <cell>Trigonometría
<row><cell lang=en>Typography                      <cell>Tipografía
<row><cell lang=en>Rhetoric                        <cell>Retórica
<row><cell lang=en>Natural history                 <cell>Historia natural
<row><cell lang=en>Physics                         <cell>Física
<row><cell lang=en>Chemistry                       <cell>Química
<row><cell lang=en>Philosophy                      <cell>Filosofía
<row><cell lang=en>Logic                           <cell>Lógica
<row><cell lang=en>Metaphysics                     <cell>Metafísica
<row><cell lang=en>Cosmogony                       <cell>Cosmogonía
<row><cell lang=en>Physiology                      <cell>Fisiología
<row><cell lang=en>Meteorology                     <cell>Meteorología
<row><cell lang=en>Mechanics                       <cell>Mecánica
<row><cell lang=en>Geology                         <cell>Geología
<row><cell lang=en>Law                             <cell>Derecho
<row><cell lang=en>Pharmacy                        <cell>Farmacia
<row><cell lang=en>Architecture                    <cell>Arquitectura
<row><cell lang=en>Anatomy                         <cell>Anatomía
<row><cell lang=en>Sculpture                       <cell>Escultura
<row><cell lang=en>Photography                     <cell>Fotografía
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Comerce>Commerce</corr>                         <cell>Comercio
<row><cell lang=en>Agriculture                     <cell>Agricultura
<row><cell lang=en>Mineralogy                      <cell>Mineralogía
<row><cell lang=en>Zoology                         <cell>Zoología
<row><cell lang=en>Astronomy                       <cell>Astronomía
<row><cell lang=en>Botany                          <cell>Botánica
<row><cell lang=en>History                         <cell>Historia
<row><cell lang=en>Medicine                        <cell>Medicina
<row><cell lang=en>Surgery                         <cell>Cirugía
<row><cell lang=en>Theology                        <cell>Teología
<pb n=64 id=pb64><row><cell lang=en>Philology                    <cell>Filología
<row><cell lang=en>Metallurgy                   <cell>Metalurgia
<row><cell lang=en>Painting                     <cell>Pintura
<row><cell lang=en>Engraving                    <cell>Grabado
<row><cell lang=en>Telegraph                    <cell>Telégrafo
<row><cell lang=en>Voltameter                   <cell>Voltámetro
<row><cell lang=en>Thermometer                  <cell>Termómetro
<row><cell lang=en>Telescope                    <cell>Telescopio
<row><cell lang=en>Anemometer                   <cell>Anemómetro
<row><cell lang=en>Sextant                      <cell>Sextante
<row><cell lang=en>Compass                      <cell>Brújula
<row><cell lang=en>Astrolabe                    <cell>Astrolabio
<row><cell lang=en>Press                        <cell>Prensa. Lugpitanan
<row><cell lang=en>Locomotive                   <cell>Locomotora
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar-mill                   <cell>Intosan
<row><cell lang=en>Loom                         <cell>Halablan
<row><cell lang=en>Cable                        <cell>Cable
<row><cell lang=en>Barometer                    <cell>Barómetro
<row><cell lang=en>Pump                         <cell>Bomba
<row><cell lang=en>Electromotor                 <cell>Máquina eléctrica
<row><cell lang=en>Crucible                     <cell>Crisol
<row><cell lang=en>Pluviometer                  <cell>Pluviómetro
<row><cell lang=en>Gas                          <cell>Gas
<row><cell lang=en>Sphere                       <cell>Esfera
<row><cell lang=en>Alembic                      <cell>Alambique
<row><cell lang=en>Steam-engine                 <cell>Máquina de vapor
<row><cell lang=en>Air-pump                     <cell>Máquina pneumática
<row><cell lang=en>Electrical light             <cell>Luz eléctrica
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Accid>Acid</corr>                        <cell>Acido
<row><cell lang=en>Telephone                    <cell>Teléfono
<row><cell lang=en>Wind-mill                    <cell>Molino de viento
<pb n=65 id=pb65><row><cell lang=en>Phonograph                       <cell>Fonógrafo
<row><cell lang=en>Air-balloon                      <cell>Globo
<row><cell lang=en>Type-writer                      <cell>Máquina sa pagsulat
<row><cell lang=en>Sewing-machine                   <cell>Máquina sa pagtahi
<row><cell lang=en>Spinning-wheel                   <cell>Galin&gtilde;an
</table>


<div1 id=s32>
<head>M&gtilde;a guinharian, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Kingdom                          <cell>Guinharian
<row><cell lang=en>Nation                           <cell>Nación
<row><cell lang=en>Province                         <cell>Provincia
<row><cell lang=en>State                            <cell>Estado
<row><cell lang=en>Republic                         <cell>República
<row><cell lang=en>Empire                           <cell>Imperio
<row><cell lang=en>Native land                      <cell>Yutang nataohan
<row><cell lang=en>City                             <cell>Ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>Village. Town                    <cell>Longsod
<row><cell lang=en>Suburb                           <cell>Barrio
<row><cell lang=en>Citizen                          <cell>Taga ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>Villager                         <cell>Tagilongsod
<row><cell lang=en>Peasant                          <cell>Longsodanon
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Inhabitans>Inhabitants</corr>                       <cell>M&gtilde;a molopio
<row><cell lang=en>Asia                             <cell>Asia
<row><cell lang=en>An <corr sic=asiatic>Asiatic</corr>                       <cell>Usa ca tao taga Asia
<row><cell lang=en>Africa                           <cell>Africa
<row><cell lang=en>An <corr sic=african>African</corr>                       <cell>Tao taga Africa
<row><cell lang=en>America                          <cell>América
<row><cell lang=en>An <corr sic=american>American</corr>                      <cell>Tao taga América
<row><cell lang=en>Europe                           <cell>Europa
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=An>A</corr> <corr sic=european>European</corr>                      <cell>Tao taga Europa
<row><cell lang=en>Spain                            <cell>España
<pb n=66 id=pb66><row><cell lang=en>A Spaniard                   <cell>Usa ca cachila
<row><cell lang=en>France                       <cell>Francia
<row><cell lang=en>A Frenchman                  <cell>Tao taga Francia
<row><cell lang=en>The French                   <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a taga Francia
<row><cell lang=en>England                      <cell>Inglaterra
<row><cell lang=en>An Englishman                <cell>Usa ca inglés
<row><cell lang=en>Germany                      <cell>Alemania
<row><cell lang=en>A German                     <cell>Usa ca alemán
<row><cell lang=en>Italy                        <cell>Italia
<row><cell lang=en>An Italian                   <cell>Tao taga Italia
<row><cell lang=en>Turkey                       <cell>Turquía
<row><cell lang=en>A Turk                       <cell>Usa ca turco
<row><cell lang=en>Russia                       <cell>Rusia
<row><cell lang=en>A Russian                    <cell>Tao taga Rusia
<row><cell lang=en>Arabia                       <cell>Arabia
<row><cell lang=en>An Arab                      <cell>Usa ca árabe
<row><cell lang=en>China                        <cell>Cainsican
<row><cell lang=en>A Chinese                    <cell>Usa ca insic
<row><cell lang=en>Japan                        <cell>Japón
<row><cell lang=en>A Japanese                   <cell>Usa ca japonés
<row><cell lang=en>United States                <cell>Estados Unidos
<row><cell lang=en>An American                  <cell>Usa ca americano
<row><cell lang=en>American woman               <cell>Babayeng americana
<row><cell lang=en>The Philippine Islands       <cell>Islas Filipinas
<row><cell lang=en>A Filipino                   <cell>Usa ca filipino
<row><cell lang=en>A Tagalo                     <cell>Usa ca tagalog
<row><cell lang=en>A Bisaya                     <cell>Usa ca bisaya
<row><cell lang=en>A <corr sic=cebuano>Cebuano</corr>                    <cell>Usa ca sugbuanon
<row><cell lang=en>Bisaya woman                 <cell>Babayeng bisaya
<row><cell lang=en>The language                 <cell>Ang pinamulon&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Bisaya                       <cell>Binisaya
<pb n=67 id=pb67><row><cell lang=en>English                        <cell>Iningles
<row><cell lang=en>Spanish                        <cell>Quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>Chinese                        <cell>Ininsic
</table>


<div1 id=s33>
<head>M&gtilde;a ponoan ug m&gtilde;a magsisilve sa singbahan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The Pope                       <cell>Ang santos n&gtilde;a Papa
<row><cell lang=en>Cardinal                       <cell>Cardenal
<row><cell lang=en>Patriarch                      <cell>Patriarca
<row><cell lang=en>Archbishop                     <cell>Arzobispo
<row><cell lang=en>Bishop                         <cell>Obispo
<row><cell lang=en>Priest                         <cell>Sacerdote. Pare
<row><cell lang=en>Parish priest                  <cell>Cura
<row><cell lang=en>Clergyman                      <cell>Clérigo
<row><cell lang=en>Clergy                         <cell>Caparian
<row><cell lang=en>Canon                          <cell>Canónigo
<row><cell lang=en>Chaplain                       <cell>Capellán
<row><cell lang=en>Minister                       <cell>Ministro
<row><cell lang=en>Vicar                          <cell>Vicario. Coadjutor
<row><cell lang=en>Preacher                       <cell>Palauali
<row><cell lang=en>Friar                          <cell>Fraile. Pare
<row><cell lang=en>Abbot                          <cell>Abad
<row><cell lang=en>Abbess                         <cell>Abadesa
<row><cell lang=en>Monk                           <cell>Monje
<row><cell lang=en>Nun                            <cell>Monja
<row><cell lang=en>Missionary                     <cell>Misionero
<row><cell lang=en>Deacon                         <cell>Diácono
<row><cell lang=en>Acolyte                        <cell>Acólitos
<row><cell lang=en>Cantor                         <cell>Cantor
<row><cell lang=en>Sexton                         <cell>Sacristán
<row><cell lang=en>Ringer                         <cell>Campanero
<pb n=68 id=pb68><row><cell lang=en>Organist                      <cell>Organista
<row><cell lang=en>Augustinian father            <cell>Pare n&gtilde;a Agustinos
<row><cell lang=en>Jesuit father                 <cell>Pare n&gtilde;a Jesuita
<row><cell lang=en>Recoleto father               <cell>Pare n&gtilde;a Recoleto
</table>


<div1 id=s34>
<head>M&gtilde;a ponoan ug lain pang m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a may catungdanan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Emperor                       <cell>Emperador
<row><cell lang=en>Empress                       <cell>Emperatriz
<row><cell lang=en>King                          <cell>Hari
<row><cell lang=en>Queen                         <cell>Reina
<row><cell lang=en>Prince                        <cell>Príncipe
<row><cell lang=en>Princess                      <cell>Princesa
<row><cell lang=en>Minister                      <cell>Ministro
<row><cell lang=en>Duke                          <cell>Duque
<row><cell lang=en>Earl. Count                   <cell>Conde
<row><cell lang=en>Countess                      <cell>Condesa
<row><cell lang=en>Duchess                       <cell>Duquesa
<row><cell lang=en>Marquis                       <cell>Marqués
<row><cell lang=en>Marchioness                   <cell>Marquesa
<row><cell lang=en>Baron                         <cell>Barón
<row><cell lang=en>Baroness                      <cell>Baronesa
<row><cell lang=en>Ambassador                    <cell>Embajador
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Goverment>Government</corr>                     <cell>Gobierno
<row><cell lang=en>Governor                      <cell>Gobernador
<row><cell lang=en>The Authorities               <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a ponoan
<row><cell lang=en>A chief                       <cell>Usa ca ponoan, pan&gtilde;ulo
<row><cell lang=en>A chairman                    <cell>Usa ca pan&gtilde;olo
<row><cell lang=en>A consul                      <cell>Usa ca consul
<row><cell lang=en>The president                 <cell>Ang presidente
<pb n=69 id=pb69><row><cell lang=en>A colonel                     <cell>Usa ca coronel
<row><cell lang=en>A captain                     <cell>Usa ca capitán
<row><cell lang=en>A mayor                       <cell>Usa ca general
<row><cell lang=en>A lieutenant                  <cell>Usa ca teniente
<row><cell lang=en>A corporal                    <cell>Usa ca cabo
<row><cell lang=en>A soldier                     <cell>Usa ca soldado
<row><cell lang=en>A policeman                   <cell>Usa ca policía
<row><cell lang=en>A judge                       <cell>Usa ca hocom
<row><cell lang=en>The jury                      <cell>Ang jurado
<row><cell lang=en>A lawyer                      <cell>Usa ca abogado
<row><cell lang=en>A fiscal                      <cell>Usa ca fiscal
<row><cell lang=en>A <corr sic=registerer>registrar</corr>                    <cell>Usa ca registrador
<row><cell lang=en>An attorney                   <cell>Usa ca procurador
<row><cell lang=en>A secretary                   <cell>Usa ca secretario
<row><cell lang=en>An inspector                  <cell>Usa ca inspector
<row><cell lang=en>A superintendent              <cell>Usa ca superintendente
<row><cell lang=en>A notary                      <cell>Usa ca notario
<row><cell lang=en>Court of justice              <cell>Juzgado. Hocmanan
<row><cell lang=en>Judge of peace                <cell>Juez de paz
<row><cell lang=en>A bailiff                     <cell>Usa ca alguacil
<row><cell lang=en>A detective                   <cell>Usa ca policía secreta
<row><cell lang=en>A jailer                      <cell>Usa ca alcaide
<row><cell lang=en>A post-master                 <cell>Usa ca administrador sa correo
</table>


<div1 id=s35>
<head>Laing laing m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a may oficio con catungdanan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>A barber                      <cell>Usa ca mananalot
<row><cell lang=en>A jeweller                    <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a hias
<pb n=70 id=pb70><row><cell lang=en>A washer-woman               <cell>Usa ca mamumunac n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>A laundress                  <cell>Usa ca mamumunac ug maguutao
<row><cell lang=en>A baker                      <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa pan
<row><cell lang=en>A harness-maker              <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa guarniciones
<row><cell lang=en>A brewer                     <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia ug cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>A coach builder              <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a carruage
<row><cell lang=en>A hatter                     <cell>Usa ca magbobohat sa m&gtilde;a calo
<row><cell lang=en>A milliner                   <cell>Usa ca magbobohat sa m&gtilde;a calo sa babaye
<row><cell lang=en>A tailor                     <cell>Usa ca mananahi
<row><cell lang=en>A grocer                     <cell>Usa ca <corr sic="magbaliliguia">magbabaliguia</corr> ug panacot
<row><cell lang=en>A dress-maker, seamstress    <cell>Usa ca mananahi n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>A black-smith                <cell>Usa ca panday sa puthao
<row><cell lang=en>A fruiterer                  <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia ug bon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>A watch-maker                <cell>Usa ca maggagama sa m&gtilde;a horasan
<row><cell lang=en>A milk man                   <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>A book seller                <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>A compositor                 <cell>Usa ca cajista
<pb n=71 id=pb71><row><cell lang=en>A mason                  <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a cota
<row><cell lang=en>A carpenter              <cell>Usa ca panday
<row><cell lang=en>A silver-smith           <cell>Usa ca mananalsal ug salapi
<row><cell lang=en>A painter                <cell>Usa ca pintor
<row><cell lang=en>A locksmith              <cell>Usa ca magbobohat sa m&gtilde;a llavihan
<row><cell lang=en>A physician, doctor      <cell>Usa ca médico
<row><cell lang=en>A medicaster             <cell>Usa ca mananambal
<row><cell lang=en>A pharmacist             <cell>Usa ca maggagama sa m&gtilde;a tambal
<row><cell lang=en>A dentist                <cell>Usa ca mananambal sa m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;ipon
<row><cell lang=en>A teacher                <cell>Usa ca magtotoon
<row><cell lang=en>A grammar teacher        <cell>Usa ca magtotoon sa gramática
<row><cell lang=en>A school teacher         <cell>Usa ca magtotoon sa m&gtilde;a escuela
<row><cell lang=en>A music professor        <cell>Usa ca magtotodlo sa música
<row><cell lang=en>A scholar                <cell>Usa ca tinonan
<row><cell lang=en>A writer                 <cell>Usa ca magsusulat
<row><cell lang=en>A machinist              <cell>Usa ca magbobohat sa m&gtilde;a máquina
<row><cell lang=en>An author                <cell>Usa ca magsusulat sa m&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>A dyer                   <cell>Usa ca magtitina sa panapton
<row><cell lang=en>A book-binder            <cell>Usa ca maghahanig sa m&gtilde;a libro
<pb n=72 id=pb72><row><cell lang=en>A potter                    <cell>Usa ca magbolohat ug m&gtilde;a colon &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>A stationer                 <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia ug papel, sobres, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>A hair-dresser              <cell>Usa ca magsusudlay sa buhoc
<row><cell lang=en>A basket-maker              <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a bocag
<row><cell lang=en>An inn keeper               <cell>Usa ca magbalantay sa doong
<row><cell lang=en>A tinsmith                  <cell>Usa ca magbolohat ug farol, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>An interpreter              <cell>Usa ca maghuhuad
<row><cell lang=en>A professor                 <cell>Usa ca magtotodlo
<row><cell lang=en>A journalist                <cell>Usa ca magsusulat sa m&gtilde;a mantala-an
<row><cell lang=en>A musician                  <cell>Usa ca músico
<row><cell lang=en>A sculptor                  <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a larauan
<row><cell lang=en>A poet                      <cell>Usa ca magtotocod sa m&gtilde;a balac
<row><cell lang=en>A printer                   <cell>Usa ca tagimprenta
<row><cell lang=en>A shoemaker                 <cell>Usa ca magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a sapin
<row><cell lang=en>A merchant                  <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>A workman                   <cell>Usa ca mamomo-o
<row><cell lang=en>An engineer                 <cell>Usa ca ingeniero, maquinista
<row><cell lang=en>A farmer                    <cell>Usa ca magbabaul, hacendero
<row><cell lang=en>A fisher                    <cell>Usa ca mananagat
<pb n=73 id=pb73><row><cell lang=en>A cook                           <cell>Usa ca cocinero
<row><cell lang=en>A cook-maid                      <cell>Usa ca cocinera
<row><cell lang=en>A scullion                       <cell>Usa ca tanod
<row><cell lang=en>A steward                        <cell>Usa ca mayordomo
<row><cell lang=en>A butcher                        <cell>Usa ca magiihao, magbabaliguia ug carne
<row><cell lang=en>A postman                        <cell>Usa ca magbabahin sa m&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>A waiter                         <cell>Usa ca bata bata, muchacho
<row><cell lang=en>A servant                        <cell>Usa ca sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>A floor-polisher                 <cell>Usa ca lampacero
<row><cell lang=en>A porter, door keeper            <cell>Usa ca portero
<row><cell lang=en>A conductor, coachman            <cell>Usa ca cochero
<row><cell lang=en>A nursery maid                   <cell>Usa ca magbabantay sa m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>A servant maid                   <cell>Usa ca sologo-on n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>A gardener                       <cell>Usa ca magbalantay sa tanaman
<row><cell lang=en>A stable boy                     <cell>Usa ca sota
</table>


<div1 id=s36>
<head>Ubang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Augustin                         <cell>Agustin
<row><cell lang=en>Alexander                        <cell>Alejandro
<row><cell lang=en>Alphonsus                        <cell>Alfonso
<row><cell lang=en>Ambrose                          <cell>Ambrosio
<row><cell lang=en>Amelie                           <cell>Amalia
<row><cell lang=en>Ann. Nan                         <cell>Ana
<row><cell lang=en>Andrew                           <cell>Andrés
<pb n=74 id=pb74><row><cell lang=en>Anthony                      <cell>Antonio
<row><cell lang=en>Bartholomew                  <cell>Bartolomé
<row><cell lang=en>Beatrice                     <cell>Beatriz
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Binedict>Benedict</corr>                     <cell>Benito
<row><cell lang=en>Blanche                      <cell>Blanca
<row><cell lang=en>Bridget                      <cell>Brígida
<row><cell lang=en>Charles                      <cell>Carlos
<row><cell lang=en>Charlotte                    <cell>Carlota
<row><cell lang=en>Catharine, Kate              <cell>Catalina
<row><cell lang=en>Cecily                       <cell>Cecilia
<row><cell lang=en>Christopher                  <cell>Cristobal
<row><cell lang=en>James                        <cell>Diego
<row><cell lang=en>Dorothy                      <cell>Dorotea
<row><cell lang=en>Edward                       <cell>Eduardo
<row><cell lang=en>Ellen                        <cell>Elena
<row><cell lang=en>Henry                        <cell>Enrique
<row><cell lang=en>Emily                        <cell>Emilia
<row><cell lang=en>Harriet                      <cell>Enriqueta
<row><cell lang=en>Stephan                      <cell>Esteban
<row><cell lang=en>Esther                       <cell>Ester
<row><cell lang=en>Frederick                    <cell>Federico
<row><cell lang=en>Philip                       <cell>Felipe
<row><cell lang=en>Ferdinand                    <cell>Fernando
<row><cell lang=en>Frances                      <cell>Francisca
<row><cell lang=en>Francis. Franck              <cell>Francisco
<row><cell lang=en>Jasper                       <cell>Gaspar
<row><cell lang=en>Gregory                      <cell>Gregorio
<row><cell lang=en>Wilhelmine                   <cell>Guillermina
<row><cell lang=en>William, Will                <cell>Guillermo
<row><cell lang=en>Ignatius                     <cell>Ignacio
<row><cell lang=en>Agnes                        <cell>Inés
<pb n=75 id=pb75><row><cell lang=en>Elizabeth                    <cell>Isabel
<row><cell lang=en>James, Jam                   <cell>Jaime
<row><cell lang=en>George                       <cell>Jorge
<row><cell lang=en>Joseph                       <cell>José
<row><cell lang=en>John                         <cell>Juan
<row><cell lang=en>Jane                         <cell>Juana
<row><cell lang=en>Julius                       <cell>Julio
<row><cell lang=en>Eleanor                      <cell>Leonor
<row><cell lang=en>Luke                         <cell>Lucas
<row><cell lang=en>Lucy                         <cell>Lucía
<row><cell lang=en>Louis, Lewis                 <cell>Luís
<row><cell lang=en>Magdalen, Maud               <cell>Magdalena
<row><cell lang=en>Emanuel                      <cell>Manuel
<row><cell lang=en>Mark                         <cell>Marcos
<row><cell lang=en>Mary                         <cell>María
<row><cell lang=en>Matthew                      <cell>Mateo
<row><cell lang=en>Morris                       <cell>Mauricio
<row><cell lang=en>Michael                      <cell>Miguel
<row><cell lang=en>Nicholas                     <cell>Nicolás
<row><cell lang=en>Paul                         <cell>Pablo
<row><cell lang=en>Patrick                      <cell>Patricio
<row><cell lang=en>Peter                        <cell>Pedro
<row><cell lang=en>Raymund                      <cell>Ramón
<row><cell lang=en>Richard                      <cell>Ricardo
<row><cell lang=en>Robert, Robin                <cell>Roberto
<row><cell lang=en>Ralph                        <cell>Rodolfo
<row><cell lang=en>Rowland                      <cell>Roldán
<row><cell lang=en>Solomon                      <cell>Salomón
<row><cell lang=en>Sarah, Selly                 <cell>Sara
<row><cell lang=en>Sophy                        <cell>Sofía
<row><cell lang=en>Susan. Sue                   <cell>Susana
<pb n=76 id=pb76><row><cell lang=en>Theresa                        <cell>Teresa
<row><cell lang=en>Timothy                        <cell>Timoteo
<row><cell lang=en>Thomas                         <cell>Tomás
<row><cell lang=en>Zachary                        <cell>Zacarías
</table>


<div1 id=s37>
<head>M&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a igtalahod.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Mister. Mr<corr>.</corr>                    <cell>Guinoo. Señor. Don
<row><cell lang=en>Sir                            <cell>Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Lady                           <cell>Señora
<row><cell lang=en>Mistress. Mrs.                 <cell>Señora. Sra. Dña.
<row><cell lang=en>Madam                          <cell>Señora. Sra.
<row><cell lang=en>Gentleman                      <cell>Caballero
<row><cell lang=en>Master                         <cell>Señorito
<row><cell lang=en>His lordship                   <cell>Su Señoría
<row><cell lang=en>His Holiness                   <cell>Su Santidad
<row><cell lang=en>His Majesty                    <cell>Su Majestad
<row><cell lang=en>Your Highness                  <cell>Su Alteza
<row><cell lang=en>Your Excellency                <cell>Su Excelencia
<row><cell lang=en>Rev. Revdo                     <cell>Reverendo. Talohodon
<row><cell lang=en>Honorable                      <cell>Honorable. Talahodon
</table>


<div1 id=s38>
<head>Ang firmamento.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The sky                        <cell>Ang firmamento
<row><cell lang=en>The atmosphere                 <cell>Ang banua
<row><cell lang=en>The sun                        <cell>Ang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The moon                       <cell>Ang bulan
<row><cell lang=en>New moon                       <cell>Patay ang bulan
<row><cell lang=en>First quarter                  <cell>Catin
<row><cell lang=en>Full moon                      <cell>Dactol
<pb n=77 id=pb77><row><cell lang=en>Last quarter                  <cell>Muton catin
<row><cell lang=en>The stars                     <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a bito-on
<row><cell lang=en>Milky way                     <cell>Balatas
<row><cell lang=en>Comet                         <cell>Bito-on n&gtilde;a icogon
<row><cell lang=en>Meteor                        <cell>Bulalacao
<row><cell lang=en>Eclipse                       <cell>Baconaoa
<row><cell lang=en>The sunrise                   <cell>Ang casilang sa adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The sunset                    <cell>Ang casalop sa adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The <corr sic=down>dawn</corr>                      <cell>Ang banag banag
<row><cell lang=en>The twilight                  <cell>Ang salongson
<row><cell lang=en>North                         <cell>Amihan
<row><cell lang=en>South                         <cell>Habagat
<row><cell lang=en>East                          <cell>Casilan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>West                          <cell>Casadpan
<row><cell lang=en>The clouds                    <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a dagom
<row><cell lang=en>The wind                      <cell>Ang han&gtilde;in
<row><cell lang=en>The storm                     <cell>Ang onos
<row><cell lang=en>The north wind                <cell>Ang amihan
<row><cell lang=en>The south wind                <cell>Ang habagat
<row><cell lang=en>The east wind                 <cell>Ang timog
<row><cell lang=en>The west wind                 <cell>Ang balogo
<row><cell lang=en>The typhoon                   <cell>Ang baguio
<row><cell lang=en>The rain                      <cell>Ang olan
<row><cell lang=en>The drizzle                   <cell>Ang talisic
<row><cell lang=en>The shower                    <cell>Ang tabo tabo
<row><cell lang=en>The dew                       <cell>Ang yamog
<row><cell lang=en>The rainbow                   <cell>Ang balan&gtilde;ao
<row><cell lang=en>The fog                       <cell>Ang gabon
<row><cell lang=en>The lightning                 <cell>Ang quilat
<row><cell lang=en>The thunder                   <cell>Ang dalogdog
<row><cell lang=en>The thunder bolt              <cell>Ang linti
<pb n=78 id=pb78><row><cell lang=en>The weather                  <cell>Ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>Warm                         <cell>Mainit
<row><cell lang=en>Cold                         <cell>Matugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Gloomy                       <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon
<row><cell lang=en>Dry                          <cell>Mamala
<row><cell lang=en>Damp                         <cell>Mabasa basa
<row><cell lang=en>The brightness               <cell>Ang calamdag
<row><cell lang=en>The darkness                 <cell>Ang can&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it
<row><cell lang=en>Hot weather                  <cell>Alin&gtilde;asa
<row><cell lang=en>Mist                         <cell>Alisn&gtilde;ao
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Dreeze>Breeze</corr>                       <cell>Hoyohoy
<row><cell lang=en>Shade                        <cell><corr sic=Langdum>Landung</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Clearness                    <cell>Cahayag
</table>


<div1 id=s39>
<head>Ang yuta.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Earth. Land                  <cell>Yuta
<row><cell lang=en>World                        <cell>Calibutan
<row><cell lang=en>Continent                    <cell>Dacong yuta
<row><cell lang=en>Peninsula                    <cell>Península
<row><cell lang=en>Island                       <cell>Polo
<row><cell lang=en>Archipelago                  <cell>Capopod-an
<row><cell lang=en>Isthmus                      <cell>Gitos
<row><cell lang=en>Cape                         <cell>Quinatomian
<row><cell lang=en>Point. Cape                  <cell>Catadman
<row><cell lang=en>Coast                        <cell>Baybayon
<row><cell lang=en>Sea-shore                    <cell>Bactason
<row><cell lang=en>Shores                       <cell>M&gtilde;a daplin sa suba
<row><cell lang=en>Mountain                     <cell>Buquid
<row><cell lang=en>Mountains                    <cell>Cabuquidan
<row><cell lang=en>Range of mountains           <cell>Tagaytay
<pb n=79 id=pb79><row><cell lang=en>Hill                           <cell>Bongtod
<row><cell lang=en>Cliff                          <cell>Ili
<row><cell lang=en>Slope                          <cell>Baquilid
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Walley>Valley</corr>                         <cell>Ualog
<row><cell lang=en>Plain                          <cell>Datag
<row><cell lang=en>Desert                         <cell>Camin&gtilde;aoan
<row><cell lang=en>Volcano                        <cell>Volcán
<row><cell lang=en>Wood                           <cell>Lasang
<row><cell lang=en>Cave                           <cell>Lan&gtilde;ub
<row><cell lang=en>Stone                          <cell>Bato
<row><cell lang=en>Earthquake                     <cell>Linog
</table>


<div1 id=s40>
<head>Ang tubig.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sea                            <cell>Dagat
<row><cell lang=en>Bay                            <cell>Looc
<row><cell lang=en>Current                        <cell>Sulug
<row><cell lang=en>Waves                          <cell>Balod
<row><cell lang=en>Gulf                           <cell>Laod
<row><cell lang=en>Channel                        <cell>Sauan
<row><cell lang=en>Strait                         <cell>Silan&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Port                           <cell>Dungoanan
<row><cell lang=en>Reef                           <cell>Tacot
<row><cell lang=en>Sand-bank                      <cell>Pasil
<row><cell lang=en>Flood-tide                     <cell>Taob
<row><cell lang=en>Ebb-tide                       <cell>Honas
<row><cell lang=en>Spring-tide                    <cell>Sicla
<row><cell lang=en>Neap-tide                      <cell>Quibit
<row><cell lang=en>Foam                           <cell>Bulac
<row><cell lang=en>River                          <cell>Suba
<row><cell lang=en>Brook                          <cell>Sapa
<pb n=80 id=pb80><row><cell lang=en>Stream                         <cell>Sapa sapa
<row><cell lang=en>Rill                           <cell>Salóg
<row><cell lang=en>Lake                           <cell>Danao
<row><cell lang=en>Spring                         <cell>Tubud
<row><cell lang=en>Fountain                       <cell>Tubudan
<row><cell lang=en>Watering                       <cell>Tubigon
<row><cell lang=en>Well                           <cell>Atabay
<row><cell lang=en>Fall                           <cell>Ambacan
<row><cell lang=en>Salt-water                     <cell>Tubig sa dagat
<row><cell lang=en>Spring-water                   <cell>Tubig sa tubud
<row><cell lang=en>Deluge                         <cell>Pagcalonop <corr sic=su>sa</corr> calibutan
<row><cell lang=en>Inundation                     <cell>Pagcalonop. Pagbaha
<row><cell lang=en>A drop                         <cell>Usa ca tolo
</table>


<div1 id=s41>
<head>Ang tanaman.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>To sow                         <cell>Pagpugas
<row><cell lang=en>Sowing                         <cell>Baul
<row><cell lang=en>Sowing season                  <cell>Tigpugas
<row><cell lang=en>To plant                       <cell>Pagtanom
<row><cell lang=en>Plant                          <cell>Tanom
<row><cell lang=en>Plantation                     <cell>Tanaman
<row><cell lang=en>To plough                      <cell>Pagdaro
<row><cell lang=en>To dig                         <cell>Pagcalot
<row><cell lang=en>To weed                        <cell>Pagbonglay
<row><cell lang=en>To reap                        <cell>Paggalab
<row><cell lang=en>To harvest                     <cell>Pagani
<row><cell lang=en>Harvest season                 <cell>Tigani
<row><cell lang=en>Harvest                        <cell>Inani
<row><cell lang=en>Farm                           <cell>Hacienda. Baul
<row><cell lang=en>Garden                         <cell>Tanaman sa m&gtilde;a bulac
<pb n=81 id=pb81><row><cell lang=en>A tree                      <cell>Usa ca cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Grove                       <cell>Cacahuyan
<row><cell lang=en>Orchard                     <cell>Lahuerta
<row><cell lang=en>Trunk of a tree             <cell>Tugdan
<row><cell lang=en>Bark                        <cell>Panit sa cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Root                        <cell>Gamot
<row><cell lang=en>Branch                      <cell>San&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Sprig                       <cell>Salingsing
<row><cell lang=en>Stem                        <cell>Odlot
<row><cell lang=en>Germ                        <cell>Saha
<row><cell lang=en>Bud                         <cell>Bios
<row><cell lang=en>Flower                      <cell>Bulac
<row><cell lang=en>Leaf                        <cell>Dahon
<row><cell lang=en>Sap                         <cell>Duga
<row><cell lang=en>Fruit                       <cell>Bon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Seed                        <cell>Binhi
<row><cell lang=en>Stone of fruit              <cell>Liso
<row><cell lang=en>Grain                       <cell>Lugas
<row><cell lang=en>Bunch                       <cell>Bulig
<row><cell lang=en>Spike                       <cell>Uhay
<row><cell lang=en>Spike of maize              <cell>Puso
<row><cell lang=en>Herb                        <cell>Balili
<row><cell lang=en>Grass. Hay                  <cell>Cogon. Compay
<row><cell lang=en>Straw                       <cell>Dagami
<row><cell lang=en>Wheat                       <cell>Trigo
<row><cell lang=en>Millet                      <cell>Daua
<row><cell lang=en>Rice                        <cell>Humay
<row><cell lang=en>Rice-field                  <cell>Humayan
<row><cell lang=en>Maize                       <cell>Mais
<row><cell lang=en>Maize-field                 <cell>Maisan
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar cane                  <cell>Tobo
<pb n=82 id=pb82><row><cell lang=en>Sugar-plantation               <cell>Catubhan
<row><cell lang=en>Indigo plant                   <cell>Tagom. Añil
<row><cell lang=en>Tobacco plant                  <cell>Tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-tree                    <cell>Cafeto
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee-plantation              <cell>Capihan
<row><cell lang=en>Cacao-tree                     <cell>Cacao
<row><cell lang=en>Cacao-plantation               <cell>Cacaoan
<row><cell lang=en>Coca-plant                     <cell>Lactang
<row><cell lang=en>Banana-tree                    <cell>Saguing
<row><cell lang=en>Banana-plantation              <cell>Saguin&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Hemp-tree                      <cell>Lanot
<row><cell lang=en>Hemp-plantation                <cell>Abacahan
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Cutton-plant>Cotton-plant</corr>                   <cell>Gapas
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Cutton-plantation>Cotton-plantation</corr>              <cell>Gapasan
<row><cell lang=en>Vine-arbor                     <cell>Paras
<row><cell lang=en>Guava-tree                     <cell>Bayabas
<row><cell lang=en>Papaw-tree                     <cell>Papaya
<row><cell lang=en>Fig-tree                       <cell>Higuera
<row><cell lang=en>Date tree                      <cell>Datilero
<row><cell lang=en>Ebony                          <cell>Bantulinao
<row><cell lang=en>Mango-tree                     <cell>Manga
<row><cell lang=en>Cocoa-tree                     <cell>Lubi
<row><cell lang=en>Cocoa-plantation               <cell>Calubihan
<row><cell lang=en>Cinchona                       <cell>Ditá. Quina
<row><cell lang=en>Mani-plant                     <cell>Mani
<row><cell lang=en>Rattan                         <cell>Ouay
<row><cell lang=en>Vegetables                     <cell>M&gtilde;a utan
<row><cell lang=en>Pulse                          <cell>Lagotmon
<row><cell lang=en>Spanish peas                   <cell>Garbanzos
<row><cell lang=en>Potatoes                       <cell>Patatas
<row><cell lang=en>Sweet potato                   <cell>Camote. Batatas
<pb n=83 id=pb83><row><cell lang=en>Lettuce                      <cell>Lechugas
<row><cell lang=en>Tomato                       <cell>Tomates
<row><cell lang=en>Parsley                      <cell>Perejil
<row><cell lang=en>Radishes                     <cell>Rábanos
<row><cell lang=en>Onion                        <cell>Cebollas
<row><cell lang=en>Cabbage                      <cell>Coles. Repollo
<row><cell lang=en>Beet                         <cell>Acelga
<row><cell lang=en>Balsamine-plant              <cell>Palea
<row><cell lang=en>Garlic                       <cell>Ajos. Bauang
<row><cell lang=en>Cucumber                     <cell>Pepino
<row><cell lang=en>Water-melon                  <cell>Atimon. Sandía
<row><cell lang=en>Pine-apple                   <cell>Piña
<row><cell lang=en>Lemon-tree                   <cell>Limonero
<row><cell lang=en>Orange-tree                  <cell>Naranjo. Ucban
<row><cell lang=en>Fungus                       <cell>Ohong
</table>


<div1 id=s42>
<head>M&gtilde;a mananap.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Animal                       <cell>Mananap
<row><cell lang=en>Domestic animals             <cell>M&gtilde;a hayopan
<row><cell lang=en>Cat                          <cell>Iring
<row><cell lang=en>Kitten                       <cell>Itoy sa iring
<row><cell lang=en>Dog                          <cell>Iro
<row><cell lang=en>Pup                          <cell>Tocoy
<row><cell lang=en>Rabbit                       <cell>Conejo
<row><cell lang=en>Cow                          <cell>Vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Kine. Cows                   <cell>M&gtilde;a vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Bull                         <cell>Toro
<row><cell lang=en>Ox                           <cell>Vaca n&gtilde;a laqui
<row><cell lang=en>Calf                         <cell>Vacang dumalaga
<row><cell lang=en>Horse                        <cell>Cabayo
<pb n=84 id=pb84><row><cell lang=en>Mare                          <cell>Cabayo n&gtilde;a baye
<row><cell lang=en>Foal                          <cell>Nati sa cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Colt                          <cell>Nating laqui sa cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Filly                         <cell>Nati n&gtilde;a baye sa cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Goat                          <cell>Canding
<row><cell lang=en>She-goat<note n=1 lang=ceb>Ang tolomanon sa paggamit sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi lang=en>male</hi> ug <hi lang=en>female</hi> sa paglain sa m&gtilde;a lalaqui sa m&gtilde;a babaye matuman usab sa m&gtilde;a mananap sa paglain sa m&gtilde;a laqui sa m&gtilde;a baye. Dinhi niini naonahan ang m&gtilde;a sustantivo sa m&gtilde;a pronombre <hi>he</hi> ug <hi>she</hi>; sanglet: <hi>he</hi>-goat, canding n&gtilde;a laqui; <hi>she</hi>-goat, canding n&gtilde;a baye. Sa paglain sa m&gtilde;a langgam naonahan ang sustantivo sa m&gtilde;a pulong <hi>cock</hi> ug <hi>hen</hi>: <hi>cock</hi>-sparrow, gorrion n&gtilde;a laqui; <hi>hen</hi>-sparrow, gorrion n&gtilde;a baye. Sayod ang magbabasa n&gtilde;a dili magaona quining m&gtilde;a pulong cun dili sa m&gtilde;a sustantivo n&gtilde;a iningles n&gtilde;a maoy cahologan ug usa ca mananap cun langgam ba n&gtilde;a laqui ug baye.</note>                   <cell>Canding n&gtilde;a baye
<row><cell lang=en>Kid                           <cell>Itoy sa canding
<row><cell lang=en>Ram                           <cell>Carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Ewe                           <cell>Carnero n&gtilde;a baye
<row><cell lang=en>Lamb                          <cell>Itoy sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Pig                           <cell>Babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Sow                           <cell>Babuy n&gtilde;a baye. Anayon
<row><cell lang=en>Swine                         <cell>M&gtilde;a anayon
<row><cell lang=en>Sucking pig                   <cell>Bactin
<row><cell lang=en>Mule                          <cell>Mulo
<row><cell lang=en>Donkey                        <cell>Asno
<row><cell lang=en>Buffalo                       <cell>Calabao
<row><cell lang=en>Lion                          <cell>Leon
<row><cell lang=en>Elephant                      <cell>Gadya
<row><cell lang=en>Deer                          <cell>Usa
<row><cell lang=en>Hind                          <cell>Libay
<row><cell lang=en>Squirrel                      <cell>Boot
<pb n=85 id=pb85><row><cell lang=en>Wild boar                       <cell>Pacot
<row><cell lang=en>Pole-cat                        <cell>Milo
<row><cell lang=en>Monkey                          <cell>Amo
<row><cell lang=en>Civet-cat                       <cell>Singgalon
<row><cell lang=en>Cayman                          <cell>Buaya
<row><cell lang=en>Snake                           <cell>Halas
<row><cell lang=en>Boa-constrictor                 <cell>Saoa
<row><cell lang=en>Iguana                          <cell>Ibid
<row><cell lang=en>Lizard                          <cell>Haló
<row><cell lang=en>Small lizard                    <cell>Taloto
<row><cell lang=en>Mouse                           <cell>Balagtoc
<row><cell lang=en>Rat                             <cell>Ilaga
<row><cell lang=en>Toad                            <cell>Baqui
<row><cell lang=en>Leech                           <cell>Limatoc
<row><cell lang=en>Snail                           <cell>Omang
<row><cell lang=en>Mantis                          <cell>Baye baye
<row><cell lang=en>Locust                          <cell>Dolon
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Grasshoper>Grasshopper</corr>                     <cell>Alasiosi
<row><cell lang=en>Froth-worm                      <cell>Gan&gtilde;is
<row><cell lang=en>Scorpion                        <cell>Tan&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Centipede                       <cell>Olahipan
<row><cell lang=en>Spider                          <cell>Laua laua
<row><cell lang=en>Cricket                         <cell>Galin galin
<row><cell lang=en>Ant                             <cell>Hormigas
<row><cell lang=en>White ant                       <cell>Anay
<row><cell lang=en>Worm                            <cell>Olod
<row><cell lang=en>Wood-louse                      <cell>Bocboc
<row><cell lang=en>Cockroach                       <cell>Oc-oc
<row><cell lang=en>Fire-fly                        <cell>Anunugba
<row><cell lang=en>Butterfly                       <cell>Alibangbang
<row><cell lang=en>Fly                             <cell>Lan&gtilde;ao
<pb n=86 id=pb86><row><cell lang=en>Pterophorus                    <cell>Higog-higog
<row><cell lang=en>Mosquito                       <cell>Namoc
<row><cell lang=en>Spanish fly                    <cell>Lagong Cantárida
<row><cell lang=en>Hornet                         <cell>Lagong
<row><cell lang=en>Wasp                           <cell>Lapinig
<row><cell lang=en>Bee                            <cell>Putiocan
<row><cell lang=en>Drone                          <cell>Boyog
<row><cell lang=en>Gad-fly                        <cell>Picot
<row><cell lang=en>Louse                          <cell>Coto coto
<row><cell lang=en>Nit                            <cell>Lusa
<row><cell lang=en>Bug                            <cell>Cuting
<row><cell lang=en>Flea                           <cell>Coto
<row><cell lang=en>Tick                           <cell>Cato
</table>


<div1 id=s43>
<head>M&gtilde;a langgam.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Bird                           <cell>Langgam
<row><cell lang=en>Parrot                         <cell>Perico
<row><cell lang=en>Raven. Crow                    <cell>Oac
<row><cell lang=en>Kite                           <cell>Banug
<row><cell lang=en>Eagle                          <cell>Manaol
<row><cell lang=en>Sparrow                        <cell>Gorrión
<row><cell lang=en>Witwall                        <cell>Antolihao
<row><cell lang=en>Starling                       <cell>Dalansiang
<row><cell lang=en>Swallow                        <cell>Sayao sayao
<row><cell lang=en>Bat                            <cell>Culagnig. Cabog
<row><cell lang=en>Owl                            <cell>Bocao
<row><cell lang=en>Wood-pecker                    <cell>Balalatoc
<row><cell lang=en>Canary                         <cell>Canario
<row><cell lang=en>Sea-gull                       <cell>Canaoay
<row><cell lang=en>Turtle-dove                    <cell>Tocmo
<pb n=87 id=pb87><row><cell lang=en>Ring-dove                     <cell>Balod
<row><cell lang=en>Magpie                        <cell>Abucay
<row><cell lang=en>Fledgeling                    <cell>Piso sa langgam
<row><cell lang=en>Bird of prey                  <cell>Sangquil
<row><cell lang=en>Fowls                         <cell>Manuc, itic, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>Cock                          <cell>Sonoy
<row><cell lang=en>Hen                           <cell>Himun&gtilde;a-an
<row><cell lang=en>Chicken                       <cell>Piso
<row><cell lang=en>Duck                          <cell>Itic
<row><cell lang=en>Drake                         <cell>Itic n&gtilde;a laqui
<row><cell lang=en>Duckling                      <cell>Piso sa itic
<row><cell lang=en>Goose                         <cell>Gaquet
<row><cell lang=en>Hen-goose                     <cell>Gaquet n&gtilde;a baye
<row><cell lang=en>Gander                        <cell>Gaquet n&gtilde;a laqui
<row><cell lang=en>Gosling                       <cell>Piso sa gaquet
<row><cell lang=en>Dove. Pigeon                  <cell>Salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Young pigeon                  <cell>Cuyabog sa salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Turkey                        <cell>Pavo
<row><cell lang=en>Swan                          <cell>Cisne
</table>


<div1 id=s44>
<head>M&gtilde;a isda, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Fish                          <cell>Isda
<row><cell lang=en>Sea-fish                      <cell>Isda sa dagat
<row><cell lang=en>River-fish                    <cell>Isda sa suba
<row><cell lang=en>Whale                         <cell>Bonansiso
<row><cell lang=en>Tunny                         <cell>Lumba lumba
<row><cell lang=en>Shark                         <cell>Iho
<row><cell lang=en>Mermaid                       <cell>Doyong
<row><cell lang=en>Sword-fish                    <cell>Pacan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Sardine                       <cell>Tangban
<pb n=88 id=pb88><row><cell lang=en>Eel                            <cell>Casili
<row><cell lang=en>Flying-fish                    <cell>Bangsi
<row><cell lang=en>Horse-mackerel                 <cell>Anduhao
<row><cell lang=en>Red mullet                     <cell>Balitobong
<row><cell lang=en>Calamary                       <cell>Cuguita
<row><cell lang=en>Turtle                         <cell>Pauican
<row><cell lang=en>Tortoise                       <cell>Ba-o
<row><cell lang=en>Lobster                        <cell>Banagan
<row><cell lang=en>Shell-fish                     <cell>Honas. Quinhason
<row><cell lang=en>Craw-fish                      <cell>Alagocoy
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Muscle>Mussel</corr>                         <cell>Bibi
<row><cell lang=en>Shrimp                         <cell>Pasayan
<row><cell lang=en>Sponge                         <cell>Bogá
<row><cell lang=en>Oyster                         <cell>Talaba
<row><cell lang=en>Crab                           <cell>Casag
<row><cell lang=en>Cuttle-fish                    <cell>Nocos
<row><cell lang=en>Conch                          <cell>Tamboli
<row><cell lang=en>Isopod                         <cell>Bocto
<row><cell lang=en>Macropod                       <cell>Bacay bacay
<row><cell lang=en>Prawn                          <cell>Olang
<row><cell lang=en>Star-fish                      <cell>Toron toron
<row><cell lang=en>Xantho                         <cell>Talamisan
<row><cell lang=en>Mother of pearl                <cell>Tipay
</table>


<div1 id=s45>
<head>Tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a mananap, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Barking of the dog             <cell>Pagcaosig sa iro
<row><cell lang=en>Mewing of the cat              <cell>Pagcain&gtilde;ao sa iring
<row><cell lang=en>Neighing of the horse          <cell>Pagcabuhihi sa cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Bleating of the sheep          <cell>Pagcabahaha sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Bellowing of the ox            <cell>Pagcain&gtilde;a sa vaca
<pb n=89 id=pb89><row><cell lang=en>Grunting of the pig        <cell>Pagcaigoc sa babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Buzzing of the bee         <cell>Pagcahagonghong sa putiocan
<row><cell lang=en>Cackle of the hen          <cell>Pagcapotac sa manuc
<row><cell lang=en>Crow of the cock           <cell>Pagcatalaoc sa sonoy
<row><cell lang=en>Croak of the raven         <cell>Pagcaiac sa oac
<row><cell lang=en>Warbling of the birds      <cell>Pagcalirog lirog sa m&gtilde;a langgam
<row><cell lang=en>Cooing of the pigeon       <cell><corr sic=Pagcaagomot>Pagcaagomod</corr> sa salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Swarm of bees              <cell>Gapot
<row><cell lang=en>Cattle                     <cell>Panon sa m&gtilde;a hayopan
<row><cell lang=en>Flock of sheep             <cell>Panon sa m&gtilde;a carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Drove                      <cell>Panon sa m&gtilde;a vacang laqui
<row><cell lang=en>Span                       <cell>Pareja sa m&gtilde;a cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Litter                     <cell>Panon sa m&gtilde;a bactin
<row><cell lang=en>Flight <corr>of </corr>pigeons           <cell>Pongdoc sa m&gtilde;a salampati
<row><cell lang=en>Shoal                      <cell>Doot
<row><cell lang=en>Shoal of herrings          <cell>Doot sa tangban
<row><cell lang=en>Hoof                       <cell>Coco. Cocod
<row><cell lang=en>Claws                      <cell>Daguit
<row><cell lang=en>Hair                       <cell>Balhibo sa mananap
<row><cell lang=en>Snout                      <cell>Simod
<row><cell lang=en>Tusk                       <cell>Bangquil
<row><cell lang=en>Skin                       <cell>Panit
<row><cell lang=en>Paws                       <cell>Ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>Jaws                       <cell>Apapan&gtilde;ig
<row><cell lang=en>Mane                       <cell>Langbon&gtilde;ay
<row><cell lang=en>Tail                       <cell>Icog
<pb n=90 id=pb90><row><cell lang=en>Horn                           <cell>Sun&gtilde;ay
<row><cell lang=en>Bristles                       <cell>Balocag
<row><cell lang=en>Wing                           <cell>Paco
<row><cell lang=en>Beak                           <cell>Son&gtilde;o
<row><cell lang=en>Cock&apos;s spur                    <cell>Tahod
<row><cell lang=en>Cock&apos;s comb                    <cell>Tapay
<row><cell lang=en>Feathers                       <cell>Balhibo sa langgam
<row><cell lang=en>Nest                           <cell>Salag
<row><cell lang=en>Scale                          <cell>Lisgis
<row><cell lang=en>Fish-bone                      <cell>Bucog sa isda
<row><cell lang=en>Gills                          <cell>Hasang
<row><cell lang=en>Fin                            <cell>Capay
</table>


<div1 id=s46>
<head>M&gtilde;a sacayan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>A vessel, ship                 <cell>Usa ca sacayan
<row><cell lang=en>A frigate                      <cell>Usa ca fragata
<row><cell lang=en>A brig                         <cell>Usa ca bergantin
<row><cell lang=en>A schooner                     <cell>Usa ca goleta
<row><cell lang=en>A boat                         <cell>Usa ca bote
<row><cell lang=en>A log, canoe                   <cell>Usa ca baroto
<row><cell lang=en>A steamer                      <cell>Usa ca vapor
<row><cell lang=en>A battleship                   <cell>Usa ca acorazado
<row><cell lang=en>A cruiser                      <cell>Usa ca crucero
<row><cell lang=en>A gun-vessel                   <cell>Usa ca cañonero
<row><cell lang=en>A gun-torpedo                  <cell>Usa ca torpedero
<row><cell lang=en>A destroyer                    <cell>Usa ca destroyer
<row><cell lang=en>A gun-boat                     <cell>Usa ca cañonera
<row><cell lang=en>A <corr sic=despacht>despatch</corr> boat                <cell>Usa ca aviso
<row><cell lang=en>A transport                    <cell>Usa ca transporte
<row><cell lang=en>A man of war                   <cell>Usa ca barco sa guerra
<pb n=91 id=pb91><row><cell lang=en>A squadron, fleet          <cell>Usa ca escuadra
<row><cell lang=en>A barge, launch            <cell>Usa ca lancha
<row><cell lang=en>A sloop                    <cell>Usa ca balandra
<row><cell lang=en>A bark                     <cell>Usa ca barca
<row><cell lang=en>A junk                     <cell>Usa ca sampan
<row><cell lang=en>British steamer            <cell><corr sic=Barco>Vapor</corr> inglés
<row><cell lang=en>Japan steamer              <cell>Vapor japonés
<row><cell lang=en>German steamer             <cell>Vapor alemán
<row><cell lang=en>French steamer             <cell>Vapor francés
<row><cell lang=en>Spanish steamer            <cell>Vapor español
<row><cell lang=en>Sailing vessel             <cell>Barco n&gtilde;a lalayagon
<row><cell lang=en>Merchant ship              <cell>Barco mercante
<row><cell lang=en>A sail                     <cell>Usa ca layag
<row><cell lang=en>The mast                   <cell>Ang talaroc
<row><cell lang=en>The deck                   <cell>Ang langcapan
<row><cell lang=en>The poop, stern            <cell>Ang ulin
<row><cell lang=en>The prow                   <cell>Ang dolong
<row><cell lang=en>The keel                   <cell>Ang onayan
<row><cell lang=en>The helm                   <cell>Ang bansalan
<row><cell lang=en>The binnacle               <cell>Ang bitácora
<row><cell lang=en>The hold                   <cell>Ang bodega
<row><cell lang=en>The engine                 <cell>Ang máquina
<row><cell lang=en>A cable                    <cell>Usa ca pisi
<row><cell lang=en>A block                    <cell>Usa ca moton
<row><cell lang=en>Oars                       <cell>M&gtilde;a gayon
<row><cell lang=en>The compass                <cell>Ang padaloman
<row><cell lang=en>The anchor                 <cell>Ang sinipit
<row><cell lang=en>Lead-line                  <cell>Tongcad
<row><cell lang=en>The flag                   <cell>Ang bandila
<row><cell lang=en>Port                       <cell>Lauiganan
<row><cell lang=en>Harbor                     <cell>Dungoanan
<pb n=92 id=pb92><row><cell lang=en>Wharf                        <cell>Muelle
<row><cell lang=en>Quay                         <cell>Tulay
<row><cell lang=en>Custom-house                 <cell>Aduana
<row><cell lang=en>Semaphore                    <cell>Semáforo
<row><cell lang=en>Light-house                  <cell>Faro
<row><cell lang=en>Buoy                         <cell>Payan payan
<row><cell lang=en>Dockyard                     <cell>Adyonan
<row><cell lang=en>Dock                         <cell>Dique
<row><cell lang=en>Captainship                  <cell>Capitanía del puerto
<row><cell lang=en>The captain                  <cell>Ang capitán
<row><cell lang=en>The mate, pilot              <cell>Ang piloto
<row><cell lang=en>A sailor                     <cell>Usa ca marino, tigsacay
<row><cell lang=en>To sail, set sail            <cell>Pagguican sa sacayan
<row><cell lang=en>To ship, load                <cell>Paglulan
<row><cell lang=en>To embark                    <cell>Pagsacay
<row><cell lang=en>To discharge                 <cell>Pagcauas
<row><cell lang=en>To land                      <cell>Pagcauas
<row><cell lang=en>To launch                    <cell>Pagpalutao
<row><cell lang=en>To cast anchor               <cell>Pagdungo
<row><cell lang=en>To weigh anchor              <cell>Pagangcal
<row><cell lang=en>High water                   <cell>Pagcataob
<row><cell lang=en>Low water                    <cell>Honasan
<row><cell lang=en>The ebbing                   <cell>Quighod
<row><cell lang=en>The flowing                  <cell>Pagcataob
<row><cell lang=en>Shipwreck                    <cell>Pagcalonod
</table>


<div1 id=s47>
<head>Ang pagcomercio.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Trade                        <cell>Pagcomercio
<row><cell lang=en>To sell                      <cell>Pagbaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>To buy                       <cell>Pagpalit
<pb n=93 id=pb93><row><cell lang=en>To change                    <cell>Pagbaylo
<row><cell lang=en>To pay                       <cell>Pagbayad
<row><cell lang=en>To owe                       <cell>Pagutang
<row><cell lang=en>To sell on credit            <cell>Pagbaliguia sa inutang
<row><cell lang=en>To sell on retail            <cell>Pagbaliguia sa tolotaguidiot
<row><cell lang=en>To sell on wholesale         <cell>Pagbaliguia sa paquiao
<row><cell lang=en>A merchant                   <cell>Usa ca magbabaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>Buyer                        <cell>Ang nagapalit
<row><cell lang=en>Seller                       <cell>Ang nagabaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>Goods                        <cell>M&gtilde;a baliguia
<row><cell lang=en>Bank                         <cell>Banco
<row><cell lang=en>Interest                     <cell>Pagcacapin
<row><cell lang=en>Debtor                       <cell>Utan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Creditor                     <cell>Hinutan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Market                       <cell>Mercado. Tianggi
<row><cell lang=en>Shop. Stall                  <cell>Tienda
<row><cell lang=en>Ware-house. Store-house      <cell>Almacén
<row><cell lang=en>The shop keeper              <cell>Ang nagatienda
<row><cell lang=en>Steel yard                   <cell>Timban&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Hemp-merchant                <cell>Magbabaliguia ug lanot
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar-merchant               <cell>Magbabaliguia ug azucar
<row><cell lang=en>Gold                         <cell>Bulauan
<row><cell lang=en>Silver                       <cell>Salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Copper                       <cell>Tumbaga
<row><cell lang=en>Lead                         <cell>Tingga
<row><cell lang=en>Tin                          <cell>Estaño
<row><cell lang=en>Zinc                         <cell>Zinc
<row><cell lang=en>Iron                         <cell>Puthao
<row><cell lang=en>Steel                        <cell>Acero
<row><cell lang=en>Nickel                       <cell>Nikel
<pb n=94 id=pb94><row><cell lang=en>Brass                            <cell>Metal
<row><cell lang=en>Coal                             <cell>Uling
<row><cell lang=en>Ivory                            <cell>Gading
<row><cell lang=en>Marble                           <cell>Marmol
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Cutton>Cotton</corr>                           <cell>Gapas
<row><cell lang=en>Flax                             <cell>Lino
<row><cell lang=en>Hemp                             <cell>Lanot
<row><cell lang=en>Muslin                           <cell>Muselina
<row><cell lang=en>Silk                             <cell>Seda
<row><cell lang=en>Wool                             <cell>Lana. Balhibo sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Stuffs                           <cell>M&gtilde;a panapton
<row><cell lang=en>Rattan                           <cell>Ouay
<row><cell lang=en>Wine                             <cell>Vino
<row><cell lang=en>Whisky                           <cell>Whisky
<row><cell lang=en>Vinegar                          <cell>Suca
<row><cell lang=en>Milk                             <cell>Gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Olive-oil                        <cell>Lana sa cachila
<row><cell lang=en>Cocoanut-oil                     <cell>Lana sa lubi
<row><cell lang=en>Petroleum                        <cell>Petroleo
<row><cell lang=en>Sherry                           <cell>Jerez
<row><cell lang=en>Gin                              <cell>Ginebra
<row><cell lang=en>Beer                             <cell>Cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Cognac                           <cell>Coñac
<row><cell lang=en>Honey                            <cell>Dugos
<row><cell lang=en>Wax                              <cell>Talo
<row><cell lang=en>Wheat                            <cell>Trigo
<row><cell lang=en>Millet                           <cell>Daua
<row><cell lang=en>Oranges                          <cell>M&gtilde;a ucban
<row><cell lang=en>Potatoes                         <cell>Patatas
<row><cell lang=en>Rice                             <cell>Bugas
<pb n=95 id=pb95><row><cell lang=en>Maize                     <cell>Maiz
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar                     <cell>Azucar
<row><cell lang=en>Molasses                  <cell>Calamay
<row><cell lang=en>Flour                     <cell>Harina
<row><cell lang=en>Dates                     <cell>Dátiles
<row><cell lang=en>Figs                      <cell>Higos
<row><cell lang=en>Indigo                    <cell>Tagom
<row><cell lang=en>Coprax                    <cell>Linuguit
<row><cell lang=en>Cocoa-nuts                <cell>M&gtilde;a lubi
<row><cell lang=en>Coffee                    <cell>Café
<row><cell lang=en>Tea                       <cell>Sha
<row><cell lang=en>Cacao                     <cell>Cacao
<row><cell lang=en>Hams                      <cell>M&gtilde;a jamon
<row><cell lang=en>Beef                      <cell>Onod sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Birds&apos; nests              <cell>M&gtilde;a salag sa m&gtilde;a sayao sayao
<row><cell lang=en>Butter                    <cell>Mantequilla
<row><cell lang=en>Cheese                    <cell>Queso
<row><cell lang=en>Cod                       <cell>Bacalao
<row><cell lang=en>Dry-fish                  <cell>Isda n&gtilde;a binulad
<row><cell lang=en>Fish                      <cell>Isda
<row><cell lang=en>Eggs                      <cell>M&gtilde;a itlog
<row><cell lang=en>Oxen                      <cell>M&gtilde;a vacang laqui
<row><cell lang=en>Horses                    <cell>M&gtilde;a cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>Buffaloes                 <cell>M&gtilde;a calabao
<row><cell lang=en>Pigs                      <cell>M&gtilde;a babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Bulls                     <cell>M&gtilde;a toro
<row><cell lang=en>Sheep                     <cell>M&gtilde;a carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Chickens                  <cell>M&gtilde;a piso
<row><cell lang=en>Birds                     <cell>M&gtilde;a langgam
<row><cell lang=en>Opium                     <cell>Opio
<pb n=96 id=pb96><row><cell lang=en>Pepper                         <cell>Malisa
<row><cell lang=en>Musk                           <cell>Catsoli
<row><cell lang=en>Salt                           <cell>Asin
<row><cell lang=en>Tobacco                        <cell>Tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>Cigars                         <cell>M&gtilde;a tinustus
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Cigarrettes>Cigarettes</corr>                   <cell>M&gtilde;a cigarrillos
<row><cell lang=en>Cloves                         <cell>Clavo
<row><cell lang=en>Brazil wood                    <cell>Sibucao
<row><cell lang=en>Camphor                        <cell>Alcanfor
<row><cell lang=en>Gun                            <cell>Tagoc
<row><cell lang=en>Spices                         <cell>Panacot
<row><cell lang=en>Dyes                           <cell>M&gtilde;a tagom
<row><cell lang=en>Tortoise-shell                 <cell>Carey. Sisic
<row><cell lang=en>Watches                        <cell>M&gtilde;a horasan
<row><cell lang=en>Jewelry                        <cell>M&gtilde;a hias
<row><cell lang=en>Soap                           <cell>Jabon. Sabon
<row><cell lang=en>Paper                          <cell>Papel
<row><cell lang=en>Matches                        <cell>Sacafuegos
<row><cell lang=en>Leather                        <cell>Panit
<row><cell lang=en>Chinaware                      <cell>Vajilla
<row><cell lang=en>Glass                          <cell>M&gtilde;a vaso, &amp;.
<row><cell lang=en>Horns                          <cell>M&gtilde;a sun&gtilde;ay
<row><cell lang=en>Hides                          <cell>M&gtilde;a panit
<row><cell lang=en>Machines                       <cell>M&gtilde;a máquina
<row><cell lang=en>Instruments                    <cell>M&gtilde;a tolongon
<row><cell lang=en>Books                          <cell>M&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>Hats                           <cell>M&gtilde;a calo
<row><cell lang=en>Furniture                      <cell>M&gtilde;a mueble
<row><cell lang=en>Harness                        <cell>Guarniciones
<row><cell lang=en>Drugs                          <cell>M&gtilde;a tambal
<row><cell lang=en>Timber                         <cell>M&gtilde;a cahoy
<pb n=97 id=pb97><row><cell lang=en>Candles                             <cell>M&gtilde;a candila
<row><cell lang=en>Pianos                              <cell>M&gtilde;a piano
<row><cell lang=en>Conserves                           <cell>M&gtilde;a lata
<row><cell lang=en>Liquors                             <cell>M&gtilde;a licor
<row><cell lang=en>Ropes                               <cell>M&gtilde;a pisi
</table>


<div1 id=s48>
<head>Ang pagisip.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>One                                 <cell>Usa
<row><cell lang=en>Two                                 <cell>Duha
<row><cell lang=en>Three                               <cell>Totolo
<row><cell lang=en>Four                                <cell>Upat
<row><cell lang=en>Five                                <cell>Lima
<row><cell lang=en>Six                                 <cell>Unum
<row><cell lang=en>Seven                               <cell>Pipito
<row><cell lang=en>Eight                               <cell>Ualo
<row><cell lang=en>Nine                                <cell>Siam
<row><cell lang=en>Ten                                 <cell>Napolo
<row><cell lang=en>Eleven                              <cell>Napolo ug usa
<row><cell lang=en>Twelve                              <cell>Napolo ug duha
<row><cell lang=en>Thirteen                            <cell>Napolo ug tolo
<row><cell lang=en>Fourteen                            <cell>Napolo ug upat
<row><cell lang=en>Fifteen                             <cell>Napolo ug lima
<row><cell lang=en>Sixteen                             <cell>Napolo ug unum
<row><cell lang=en>Seventeen                           <cell>Napolo ug pito
<row><cell lang=en>Eighteen                            <cell>Napolo ug ualo
<row><cell lang=en>Nineteen                            <cell>Napolo ug siam
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty                              <cell>Caloha-an
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty-one                          <cell>Caloha-an ug usa
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty-two                          <cell>Caloha-an ug duha
<row><cell lang=en>Thirty                              <cell>Catloan
<pb n=98 id=pb98><row><cell lang=en>Forty                              <cell>Capatan
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty                              <cell>Calim-an
<row><cell lang=en>Sixty                              <cell>Canuman
<row><cell lang=en>Seventy                            <cell>Capitoan
<row><cell lang=en>Eighty                             <cell>Caualoan
<row><cell lang=en>Ninety                             <cell>Casiaman
<row><cell lang=en>One hundred                        <cell>Usa ca gatus
<row><cell lang=en>One hundred and one                <cell>Usa ca gatus ug usa
<row><cell lang=en>One thousand                       <cell>Usa ca libo
<row><cell lang=en>One thousand and twenty            <cell>Usa ca libo ug caloha-an
<row><cell lang=en>Five thousand, one hundred and thirty-two       <cell>Lima ca libo, usa ca gatus ug catloan ug duha
<row><cell lang=en>One thousand, nine hundred and four <hi>cun</hi> nineteen hundred and four          <cell>Usa ca libo, siam ca gatus ug upat
<row><cell lang=en>One million                        <cell>Usa ca libo ca libo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The first                          <cell>Ang nahauna
<row><cell lang=en>The second                         <cell>Ang icaduha
<row><cell lang=en>The third                          <cell>Ang icatolo
<row><cell lang=en>The fourth                         <cell>Ang icaupat
<row><cell lang=en>The fifth                          <cell>Ang icalima
<row><cell lang=en>The sixth                          <cell>Ang icaunum
<row><cell lang=en>The seventh                        <cell>Ang icapito
<row><cell lang=en>The eighth                         <cell>Ang icaualo
<row><cell lang=en>The ninth                          <cell>Ang icasiam
<row><cell lang=en>The tenth                          <cell>Ang icapolo
</table>


<pb n=99 id=pb99><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The eleventh                   <cell>Ang icapolo ug usa
<row><cell lang=en>The twelfth                    <cell>Ang icapolo ug duha
<row><cell lang=en>The thirteenth                 <cell>Ang icapolo ug tolo
<row><cell lang=en>The fourteenth                 <cell>Ang icapolo ug upat
<row><cell lang=en>The fifteenth                  <cell>Ang icapolo ug lima
<row><cell lang=en>The sixteenth                  <cell>Ang icapolo ug unum
<row><cell lang=en>The seventeenth                <cell>Ang icapolo ug pito
<row><cell lang=en>The eighteenth                 <cell>Ang icapolo ug ualo
<row><cell lang=en>The nineteenth                 <cell>Ang icapolo ug siam
<row><cell lang=en>The twentieth                  <cell>Ang icacaloha-an
<row><cell lang=en>The <corr sic=twentieth-first>twenty-first</corr>            <cell>Ang icacaloha-an ug usa
<row><cell lang=en>The thirtieth                  <cell>Ang icacatloan
<row><cell lang=en>The fortieth                   <cell>Ang icacapatan
<row><cell lang=en>The fiftieth                   <cell>Ang icacalim-an
<row><cell lang=en>The sixtieth                   <cell>Ang icacanuman
<row><cell lang=en>The seventieth                 <cell>Ang icacapitoan
<row><cell lang=en>The eightieth                  <cell>Ang icacaualoan
<row><cell lang=en>The ninetieth                  <cell>Ang icacasiaman
<row><cell lang=en>The hundredth                  <cell>Ang icausa ca gatus
<row><cell lang=en>The thousandth                 <cell>Ang icausa ca libo
<row><cell lang=en>The millionth                  <cell>Ang icausa ca libo ca libo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>One part                       <cell>Usa ca bahin
<row><cell lang=en>The half                       <cell>Ang catun&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Three thirds                   <cell>Tolo ca bahin
<row><cell lang=en>A fourth                       <cell>Usa ca bahin
<row><cell lang=en>One fifth                      <cell>Usa ca icalimang bahin
<row><cell lang=en>Two fifths                     <cell>Duha ca icalimang bahin
<row><cell lang=en>Four eighths                   <cell>Upat ca icaualong bahin
<pb n=100 id=pb100><row><cell lang=en>Six tenths                        <cell>Unum ca icapulong bahin
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Once                              <cell>Nacasa. Nacausa
<row><cell lang=en>Twice                             <cell>Nacaduha
<row><cell lang=en>Three times                       <cell>Nacatolo
<row><cell lang=en>Four times                        <cell>Nacaupat
<row><cell lang=en>Ten times                         <cell>Nacapolo
<row><cell lang=en>One hundred times                 <cell>Nacagatus
<row><cell lang=en>One thousand times                <cell>Nacalibo
<row><cell lang=en>Many times                        <cell>Nacadaghan
<row><cell lang=en>A few times                       <cell>Nacapila. Talagsada
<row><cell lang=en>Some times                        <cell>Nacapila. Usahay
<row><cell lang=en>Several times                     <cell>Nacapila
<row><cell lang=en>Seldom                            <cell>Talagsada
<row><cell lang=en>Often                             <cell>Sa masubsub
</table>


<div1 id=s49>
<head>M&gtilde;a adlao, m&gtilde;a bulan, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sunday                            <cell>Domingo
<row><cell lang=en>Monday                            <cell>Lunes
<row><cell lang=en>Tuesday                           <cell>Martes
<row><cell lang=en>Wednesday                         <cell>Miércoles
<row><cell lang=en>Thursday                          <cell>Juéves
<row><cell lang=en>Friday                            <cell>Viérnes
<row><cell lang=en>Saturday                          <cell>Sábado
<row><cell lang=en>January                           <cell>Enero
<row><cell lang=en>February                          <cell>Febrero
<row><cell lang=en>March                             <cell>Marzo
<row><cell lang=en>April                             <cell>Abril
<pb n=101 id=pb101><row><cell lang=en>May                          <cell>Mayo
<row><cell lang=en>June                         <cell>Junio
<row><cell lang=en>July                         <cell>Julio
<row><cell lang=en>August                       <cell>Agosto
<row><cell lang=en>September                    <cell>Septiembre
<row><cell lang=en>October                      <cell>Octubre
<row><cell lang=en>November                     <cell>Noviembre
<row><cell lang=en>December                     <cell>Diciembre
<row><cell lang=en>The year                     <cell>Ang tuig
<row><cell lang=en>Last year                    <cell>Ang tuig n&gtilde;a miagui
<row><cell lang=en>Next year                    <cell>Ang tuig n&gtilde;a umalabut
<row><cell lang=en>Leap year                    <cell>Tuig n&gtilde;a bisiesto
<row><cell lang=en>Coming year                  <cell>Tuig n&gtilde;a umabut
<row><cell lang=en>A century                    <cell>Usa ca gatus ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>A month                      <cell>Usa ca bulan
<row><cell lang=en>A week                       <cell>Usa ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>Last week                    <cell>Semana n&gtilde;a natapus
<row><cell lang=en>Next week                    <cell>Semana n&gtilde;a mubanos
<row><cell lang=en>A day                        <cell>Usa ca adlao
<row><cell lang=en>An hour                      <cell>Usa ca horas
<row><cell lang=en>A half                       <cell>Catun&gtilde;a sa horas
<row><cell lang=en>A quarter                    <cell>Usa ca cuarto sa horas
<row><cell lang=en>A minute                     <cell>Usa ca minuto
<row><cell lang=en>A second                     <cell>Usa ca segundo
<row><cell lang=en>A moment                     <cell>Usa ca pagpiloc
<row><cell lang=en>Birthday                     <cell>Adlao sa tao
<row><cell lang=en>Day-break                    <cell>Caadlaon
<row><cell lang=en>Morning                      <cell>Buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Forenoon                     <cell>Modto
<row><cell lang=en>Noon, mid-day                <cell>Modto, odto
<row><cell lang=en>Afternoon                    <cell>Palis
<pb n=102 id=pb102><row><cell lang=en>Evening                          <cell>Hapon
<row><cell lang=en>Night                            <cell>Gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Mid-night                        <cell>Tun&gtilde;ang gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Yesterday                        <cell>Cahapon
<row><cell lang=en>To-day                           <cell>Caron adlao
<row><cell lang=en>To-night                         <cell>Caron gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Last night                       <cell>Cagabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>To-morrow                        <cell>Ugma
<row><cell lang=en>Day after to-morrow              <cell>Damlag
<row><cell lang=en>To-morrow morning                <cell>Ugma sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>To-morrow evening                <cell>Ugma sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>In the morning                   <cell>Sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>In the evening                   <cell>Sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>In the night                     <cell>Sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>In olden times                   <cell>Sa canhi. Sa caniadto. Sa onang m&gtilde;a adlao
<row><cell lang=en>In our times                     <cell>Sa atung m&gtilde;a tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>At all times                     <cell>Sa n&gtilde;atanan m&gtilde;a tiempo. Sa guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Time to come                     <cell>Tiempo n&gtilde;a umalabut
<row><cell lang=en>Always                           <cell>Guihapon. Sa guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Ever                             <cell>Guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>From this time                   <cell>Cutub caron
<row><cell lang=en>From morning till evening        <cell>Cutub sa buntag hasta sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>From evening till night          <cell>Cutub sa hapon hasta sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>From this hour till to-morrow    <cell>Cutub caron hasta sa ugma
<row><cell lang=en>From January to March            <cell>Cutub sa Enero hasta sa Marzo
<pb n=103 id=pb103><row><cell lang=en>From my childhood          <cell>Sucad sa acong pagcabata
<row><cell lang=en>From his illness           <cell>Sucad sa iyang saquit
<row><cell lang=en>Every day                  <cell>Sa adlao adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Every morning              <cell>Sa buntag buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Every week                 <cell>Sa solosemana
<row><cell lang=en>Every month                <cell>Sa bulan bulan
<row><cell lang=en>Every year                 <cell>Sa tuig tuig
<row><cell lang=en>At one o&apos;clock             <cell>Sa a la una
<row><cell lang=en>At two o&apos;clock             <cell>Sa a las dos
<row><cell lang=en>At three o&apos;clock           <cell>Sa a las tres
<row><cell lang=en>At four o&apos;clock            <cell>Sa a las cuatro
<row><cell lang=en>At five o&apos;clock            <cell>Sa a las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>At six o&apos;clock             <cell>Sa a las seis
<row><cell lang=en>At seven o&apos;clock           <cell>Sa a las siete
<row><cell lang=en>At eight o&apos;clock           <cell>Sa a las ocho
<row><cell lang=en>At nine o&apos;clock            <cell>Sa a las nueve
<row><cell lang=en>At ten o&apos;clock             <cell>Sa a las diez
<row><cell lang=en>At eleven o&apos;clock          <cell>Sa a las once
<row><cell lang=en>At twelve o&apos;clock          <cell>Sa a las doce
<row><cell lang=en>A quarter past twelve      <cell>Un cuarto para la una. Sa a las doce y cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Half past one              <cell>Media para las dos
<row><cell lang=en>A quarter to two           <cell>Tres cuartos para las dos
<row><cell lang=en>Before three o&apos;clock       <cell>Sa dili pa a las tres
<row><cell lang=en>After four o&apos;clock         <cell>Pasado na a las cuatro
<row><cell lang=en>About five o&apos;clock         <cell>Sa a las cinco capin cun culang
<row><cell lang=en>After May                  <cell>Liuas na sa Mayo
<row><cell lang=en>After Easter               <cell>Liuas sa pasco
<row><cell lang=en>Before Lent                <cell>Sa dili pa ang cuaresma
<pb n=104 id=pb104><row><cell lang=en>A.M.                         <cell>Sa dili pa mamodto
<row><cell lang=en>P.M.                         <cell>Oña na sa modto
<row><cell lang=en>At present                   <cell>Caron caron
<row><cell lang=en>The whole day                <cell>Tibooc n&gtilde;a adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The whole night              <cell>Tibooc n&gtilde;a gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>The whole week               <cell>Tibooc n&gtilde;a semana
<row><cell lang=en>The whole year               <cell>Tibooc n&gtilde;a tuig
<row><cell lang=en>Each day                     <cell>Tagsa ca adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Each night                   <cell>Tagsa ca gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Each month                   <cell>Tagsa ca bulan
<row><cell lang=en>Manila, 1st June             <cell>Manila, 1 sa Junio
<row><cell lang=en>Cebu, 2nd July               <cell>Sugbu, 2 sa Julio
<row><cell lang=en>Iloilo, 3d August            <cell>Iloilo, 3 sa Agosto
<row><cell lang=en>Cebu, 10th September 1904    <cell>Sugbu, 10 sa Septiembre sa 1904
<row><cell lang=en>Manila, 4th November 1903    <cell>Manila, 4 sa Noviembre sa 1903
<row><cell lang=en>Cebu, January the first of nineteen hundred and five            <cell>Sugbu, sa nahauna sa bulan sa Enero sa usa ca libo, siam ca gatus ug lima ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>The first                    <cell>Ang nahauna
<row><cell lang=en>The last                     <cell>Ang catapusan
<row><cell lang=en>The middle                   <cell>Ang catun&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>The beginning                <cell>Ang sinugdan
</table>


<div1 id=s50>
<head>Ang salapi.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>One peso                     <cell>Usa ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty centavos               <cell>Calim-an ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty centavos              <cell>Caloha-an ca céntimo
<pb n=105 id=pb105><row><cell lang=en>Ten centavos                  <cell>Napolo ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Five centavos                 <cell>Lima ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>One centavo                   <cell>Usa ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Half centavo                  <cell>Catun&gtilde;a sa céntimo
</table>

<p>Mao quini ang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan sa nagcalain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a moneda sa bag-ong salapi n&gtilde;a guihin&gtilde;anlan <hi>Conant</hi> cun moneda n&gtilde;a filipina.


<p><hi>Salapi sa Estados Unidos:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>One cent (tumbaga)            <cell>Usa ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Five cents (nikel)            <cell>Lima ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>One dime (salapi)             <cell>Napolo ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Quarter dollar                <cell>Caloha-an ug lima ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Half dollar                   <cell>Calim-an ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>One dollar                    <cell>Usa ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>One dollar (bulauan)          <cell>Usa ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Three dollars                 <cell>Tolo ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Quarter eagle                 <cell>Duha ca pisus ug salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Half eagle                    <cell>Lima ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Eagle                         <cell>Napolo ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Double eagle                  <cell>Caloha-an ca pisus
</table>

<p>Ang bili niining salapia doble man cun capin n&gtilde;ani sa salapi n&gtilde;a Conant.


<pb n=106 id=pb106><p><hi>M&gtilde;a moneda n&gtilde;a bulauan n&gtilde;a española ug filipina:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagsa ca pisus                    <cell>One dollar
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagurha ca pisus                  <cell>Two dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagupat ca pisus                  <cell>Four dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa taguilma ca pisus                 <cell>Five dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagualo ca pisus                  <cell>Eight dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagpolo ca pisus                  <cell>Ten dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagpolo ug unum ca <corr sic=pisos>pisus</corr>          <cell>Sixteen dollars
<row><cell lang=en>Sa tagcaloha-an ca pisus             <cell>Twenty dollars
</table>

<p>Ang m&gtilde;a moneda n&gtilde;a salapi ug tumbaga n&gtilde;a cachila ug mejicano dili ibutang co cay guipahipus na ug guiilisan sa Conant.

<p>Dunay m&gtilde;a billete n&gtilde;a americano sa Banco n&gtilde;a guibalihan ug doble sa cantidad n&gtilde;a guisulat sa maong m&gtilde;a billete.

<p>Ang m&gtilde;a billete n&gtilde;a Conant guibalihan man ang cantidad n&gtilde;a guibasa sa maong m&gtilde;a billete.

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sicaualo                    <cell>Six centavos and two eighths
<row><cell lang=en>Sicapat                     <cell>Twelve centavos and a half
<row><cell lang=en>Cahate                      <cell>Twenty five centavos
<pb n=107 id=pb107><row><cell lang=en>Salapi                       <cell>Fifty centavos
<row><cell lang=en>Pisus                        <cell>One peso
</table>

<p>Ang m&gtilde;a pulong: sicaualo, sicapat ug cahate, ug in&gtilde;on man usab, daco, colotio &amp;. dili na unta gamiton sa pagn&gtilde;alan sa m&gtilde;a moneda ug sa pagisip sa salapi, cay uala nay hinungdan.


<div1 id=s51>
<head>M&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a americano.</head>

<p><hi>Avoirdupois weight:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Ounce (oz.)                  <cell>Onza
<row><cell lang=en>Pound (lb.)                  <cell>Libra
<row><cell lang=en>Quarter (qr.)                <cell>Arroba
<row><cell lang=en>One hundredweight (cwt.)     <cell>Quintal
<row><cell lang=en>Ton (t.)                     <cell>Tonelada
</table>

<p>Ang tonelada may caloha-an ca quintal, ang quintal upat ca arroba, ang arroba caloha-an ug lima ca libra, ug ang libra napolo ug unum ca onza. Quining m&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an guipanaggamit sa pagtimbang sa m&gtilde;a baliguia.

<p><hi>Troy weight:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Grain (gr.)                  <cell>Grano
<row><cell lang=en>Pennyweight (pwt.)           <cell>Pennyweight
<row><cell lang=en>Ounce                        <cell>Onza
<row><cell lang=en>Pound                        <cell>Libra
</table>

<p>Ang libra may napolo ug duha ca onza, ang <pb n=108 id=pb108>onza caloha-an ca pennyweight ug quini caloha-an ug upat ca grano. Quining m&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an guigamit sa pagtimbang ug bulauan, salapi, m&gtilde;a mutia, &amp;.

<p><hi>Apothecaries&apos; weight:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Grain                           <cell>Grano
<row><cell lang=en>Scruple                         <cell>Escrúpulo
<row><cell lang=en>Dram                            <cell>Dracma
<row><cell lang=en>Ounce                           <cell>Onza
<row><cell lang=en>Pound                           <cell>Libra
</table>

<p>Ang libra may napolo ug duha ca onza, ang onza ualo ca dracma, ang dracma totolo ca escrúpulo ug ang escrúpulo <corr sic=coloha-an>caloha-an</corr> ca grano. Quining m&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an guigamit sa pagtimbang sa m&gtilde;a tambal.


<div1 id=s52>
<head>M&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a bisaya.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Onza                            <cell>Ounce
<row><cell lang=en>Cate                            <cell>Twenty-two ounces
<row><cell lang=en>Sinantan                        <cell>Ten cates
<row><cell lang=en>Pico                            <cell>Ten sinantans
</table>


<div1 id=s53>
<head>M&gtilde;a tacsanan n&gtilde;a americano.</head>

<p><hi>Dry measure:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Pint (pt.)                      <cell>Pinta
<row><cell lang=en>Quart (qt.)                     <cell>Quart
<row><cell lang=en>Peck (pk.)                      <cell>Celemín
<row><cell lang=en>Bushel (bu.)                    <cell>Fanega
</table>

<pb n=109 id=pb109><p><hi>Liquid measure:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Gill (gi.)                      <cell>Gill
<row><cell lang=en>Pint                            <cell>Pinta
<row><cell lang=en>Quart                           <cell>Quart
<row><cell lang=en>Gallon (gal.)                   <cell>Galon
</table>


<div1 id=s54>
<head>M&gtilde;a tacsanan n&gtilde;a bisaya.</head>

<p><hi>Sa m&gtilde;a otan:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell>Baquid                          <cell>Caban. Twenty-five gantas
<row><cell>Gantang                         <cell>Ganta. Eight chupas
<row><cell>Salupan                         <cell>Chupa
</table>

<p><hi>Sa m&gtilde;a ilimnon:</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell>Tadiao                          <cell>Sixteen gantas
<row><cell>Gantang                         <cell>Eight chupas
<row><cell>Salupan                         <cell>Chupa
</table>


<div1 id=s55>
<head>M&gtilde;a solocdan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Inch (in.)                      <cell>Punto. Pulgada
<row><cell lang=en>Finger                          <cell>Todlo
<row><cell lang=en>Hand                            <cell>Dapal
<row><cell lang=en>Span                            <cell>Dan&gtilde;ao
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Footh>Foot</corr> (ft.)                    <cell>Ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>Cubit                           <cell>Sico
<row><cell lang=en>Ell                             <cell>Vara
<row><cell lang=en>Yard (yd.)                      <cell>Yarda
<row><cell lang=en>Half yard                       <cell>Catun&gtilde;a sa yarda
<row><cell lang=en>Quarter yard                    <cell>Ang icaupat ca bahin sa yarda
<pb n=110 id=pb110><row><cell lang=en>Eighth                        <cell>Ang icaualo ca bahin sa yarda
<row><cell lang=en>Sixteenth                     <cell>Ang icapolo ug unum ca bahin sa yarda
<row><cell lang=en>Fathom                        <cell>Dupa
<row><cell lang=en>Rod (rd.)                     <cell>Lima ca yarda ug tun&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Furlong (fur.)                <cell>Capatan ca rod
<row><cell lang=en>Mile (mi.)                    <cell>Milla
<row><cell lang=en>League                        <cell>Legua
</table>


<div1 id=s56>
<head>Lain laing m&gtilde;a adjetivo.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>White                         <cell>Maputi
<row><cell lang=en>Black                         <cell>Maitum
<row><cell lang=en>Red                           <cell>Mapola
<row><cell lang=en>Yellow                        <cell>Malalag
<row><cell lang=en>Green                         <cell>Lunhao
<row><cell lang=en>Blue                          <cell>Azul
<row><cell lang=en>Bad                           <cell>Dautan
<row><cell lang=en>Good                          <cell>Maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Tall. High                    <cell>Hata-as
<row><cell lang=en>Small. Low                    <cell>Hamuho
<row><cell lang=en>Large. Big                    <cell>Daco
<row><cell lang=en>Small. Little                 <cell>Diotay
<row><cell lang=en>Nimble                        <cell>Mapiscayon
<row><cell lang=en>Lazy. Idle                    <cell>Tapolan
<row><cell lang=en>Dressed                       <cell>Vinisti
<row><cell lang=en>Naked                         <cell>Hinobo
<row><cell lang=en>Fat                           <cell>Tambuc. Supang
<row><cell lang=en>Lean                          <cell>Maniuang
<row><cell lang=en>Rough                         <cell>Mahait
<pb n=111 id=pb111><row><cell lang=en>Smooth                         <cell>Mahimlo
<row><cell lang=en>Hard                           <cell>Magahi
<row><cell lang=en>Soft                           <cell>Mahomoc
<row><cell lang=en>Sweet                          <cell>Matamis
<row><cell lang=en>Bitter                         <cell>Mapaet
<row><cell lang=en>Old                            <cell>Da-an
<row><cell lang=en>New                            <cell>Bag-o
<row><cell lang=en>Wise                           <cell>Maquinaadmanon
<row><cell lang=en>Ignorant                       <cell>Cabus
<row><cell lang=en>Merry. Glad                    <cell>Malipayon
<row><cell lang=en>Sorry. Sad                     <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon
<row><cell lang=en>Living                         <cell>Buhi
<row><cell lang=en>Dead                           <cell>Patay
<row><cell lang=en>Sick. Ill                      <cell>Masaquiton
<row><cell lang=en>Healthy                        <cell>Mapiscay
<row><cell lang=en>Tidy                           <cell>Malimpio
<row><cell lang=en>Dirty                          <cell>Mahugao
<row><cell lang=en>Fine                           <cell>Matinao
<row><cell lang=en>Muddy                          <cell>Maloboc
<row><cell lang=en>Full                           <cell>Pono
<row><cell lang=en>Empty                          <cell>Ualay sulud
<row><cell lang=en>Sharp                          <cell>Matalinis
<row><cell lang=en>Blunt                          <cell>Mabaga
<row><cell lang=en>Bright                         <cell>Mahayag
<row><cell lang=en>Dark                           <cell>Man&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it
<row><cell lang=en>Calm                           <cell>Malinao
<row><cell lang=en>Stormy                         <cell>Tigonos
<row><cell lang=en>Prodigal                       <cell>Mausicon
<row><cell lang=en>Economical                     <cell>Daguinotan
<row><cell lang=en>Wide                           <cell>Halapad
<row><cell lang=en>Narrow                         <cell>Hagoot
<pb n=112 id=pb112><row><cell lang=en>Hot                            <cell>Mainit
<row><cell lang=en>Cold                           <cell>Mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Famous                         <cell>Bantugan
<row><cell lang=en>Unknown                        <cell>Dili cailhan
<row><cell lang=en>Grateful                       <cell>Matalamdon
<row><cell lang=en>Ungrateful                     <cell>Dili matalamdon
<row><cell lang=en>Dear                           <cell>Mahal
<row><cell lang=en>Cheap                          <cell>Barato
<row><cell lang=en>Fragrant                       <cell>Mahomot
<row><cell lang=en>Fetid                          <cell>Mabaho
<row><cell lang=en>Fine                           <cell>Maanindut
<row><cell lang=en>Ugly                           <cell>Malagsot
<row><cell lang=en>Written                        <cell>Sinulat
<row><cell lang=en>Print                          <cell>Binolde
<row><cell lang=en>Worthy                         <cell>Tacus
<row><cell lang=en>Unworthy                       <cell>Dili tacus
<row><cell lang=en>Right                          <cell>Matanus
<row><cell lang=en>Oblique                        <cell>Baliquig
<row><cell lang=en>True                           <cell>Matuod
<row><cell lang=en>False                          <cell>Dili matuod
<row><cell lang=en>Useful                         <cell>Mapulus
<row><cell lang=en>Useless                        <cell>Ualay pulus
<row><cell lang=en>Free                           <cell>Binuhi
<row><cell lang=en>Fastened                       <cell>Hinoctan
<row><cell lang=en>Open                           <cell>Inocab
<row><cell lang=en>Close                          <cell>Tinacop
<row><cell lang=en>Inflamed                       <cell>Dinagcot
<row><cell lang=en>Extinguished                   <cell>Napalong
<row><cell lang=en>Kind                           <cell>Maloloyon
<row><cell lang=en>Stingy                         <cell>Sinacoan
<row><cell lang=en>Evident                        <cell>Madayag
<pb n=113 id=pb113><row><cell lang=en>Obscure                      <cell>Dili madayag
<row><cell lang=en>Dry                          <cell>Mamala
<row><cell lang=en>Wet                          <cell>Mahumud
<row><cell lang=en>Salted                       <cell>Maasgad
<row><cell lang=en>Insipid                      <cell>Matab-ang
<row><cell lang=en>Easy                         <cell>Masayon
<row><cell lang=en>Difficult                    <cell>Maculi
<row><cell lang=en>Saltish                      <cell>Matayam
<row><cell lang=en>Sour                         <cell>Maaslom
<row><cell lang=en>Light                        <cell>Maga-an
<row><cell lang=en>Heavy                        <cell>Mabugat
<row><cell lang=en>Just                         <cell>Matarung
<row><cell lang=en>Unjust                       <cell>Dili matarung
<row><cell lang=en>Happy                        <cell>Palad-an
<row><cell lang=en>Unhappy                      <cell>Ualay palad
<row><cell lang=en>Rich                         <cell>Salapian
<row><cell lang=en>Poor                         <cell>Mahan&gtilde;ol
<row><cell lang=en>Ripe                         <cell>Mahinog
<row><cell lang=en>Green                        <cell>Hilao. Linghod
<row><cell lang=en>Far                          <cell>Halayo
<row><cell lang=en>Near                         <cell>Hado-ol
<row><cell lang=en>Long                         <cell>Tag-as
<row><cell lang=en>Short                        <cell>Mubo
<row><cell lang=en>Slow                         <cell>Mahinayon
<row><cell lang=en>Swift                        <cell>Maingsilon
<row><cell lang=en>Deep                         <cell>Halalum
<row><cell lang=en>Shallow                      <cell>Hamabao
<row><cell lang=en>Polite                       <cell>Maabiabihon
<row><cell lang=en>Uncivil                      <cell>Maborong
</table>


<pb n=114 id=pb114>
<div1 id=s57>
<head>M&gtilde;a verbo.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>To go                              <cell>Pagadto
<row><cell lang=en>To come                            <cell>Paganhi
<row><cell lang=en>To walk                            <cell>Paglacao
<row><cell lang=en>To travel                          <cell>Pagviaje
<row><cell lang=en>To start, to set out, to depart    <cell>Pagguican
<row><cell lang=en>To arrive                          <cell>Pagabut
<row><cell lang=en>To go out, to come out             <cell>Paggoa
<row><cell lang=en>To go in, to come in, to enter     <cell>Pagsulud
<row><cell lang=en>To go up, to come up               <cell>Pagsaca
<row><cell lang=en>To go down, to come down           <cell>Pagcanaog
<row><cell lang=en>To mount, to ascend                <cell>Pagtugnas
<row><cell lang=en>To descend                         <cell>Pagtubong
<row><cell lang=en>To ascend                          <cell>Pagcayab
<row><cell lang=en>To descend                         <cell>Pagcunsad
<row><cell lang=en>To wing, to fly                    <cell>Paglupad
<row><cell lang=en>To ride                            <cell>Pagcabayo
<row><cell lang=en>To drive                           <cell>Pagcarruage
<row><cell lang=en>To ship, to embark                 <cell>Pagsacay
<row><cell lang=en>To land                            <cell>Pagcauas
<row><cell lang=en>To sit                             <cell>Paglingcod
<row><cell lang=en>To stand                           <cell>Pagtingdug
<row><cell lang=en>To prostrate                       <cell>Paghapa
<row><cell lang=en>To rise                            <cell>Pagbacong
<row><cell lang=en>To kneel                           <cell>Paglohod
<pb n=115 id=pb115><row><cell lang=en>To go to bed               <cell>Paghigda
<row><cell lang=en>To <corr sic=lay>lie</corr> down                <cell>Pagcaligad
<row><cell lang=en>To see                     <cell>Pagtanao. Pagsulung
<row><cell lang=en>To look at                 <cell>Pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>To look for, to seek       <cell>Pagpan&gtilde;ita
<row><cell lang=en>To inquire                 <cell>Pagsusi
<row><cell lang=en>To buy                     <cell>Pagpalit
<row><cell lang=en>To sell                    <cell>Pagbaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>To exchange                <cell>Pagbaylo. Pagilis
<row><cell lang=en>To owe                     <cell>Pagutang
<row><cell lang=en>To pay                     <cell>Pagbayad
<row><cell lang=en>To be worth                <cell>Pagbili
<row><cell lang=en>To lend                    <cell>Paghulam
<row><cell lang=en>To eat                     <cell>Pagcaon
<row><cell lang=en>To drink                   <cell>Paginom
<row><cell lang=en>To satiate                 <cell>Pagbosog
<row><cell lang=en>To be hungry               <cell>Pagutum
<row><cell lang=en>To be thirsty              <cell>Paguhao
<row><cell lang=en>To sleep                   <cell>Pagcatolog
<row><cell lang=en>To dream                   <cell>Pagdanggo
<row><cell lang=en>To wake, to watch          <cell>Pagtucao
<row><cell lang=en>To wake                    <cell>Pagpucao
<row><cell lang=en>To awake                   <cell>Paghimata
<row><cell lang=en>To wash                    <cell>Paghilamos
<row><cell lang=en>To wash                    <cell>Pagbunac
<row><cell lang=en>To iron                    <cell>Pagutao
<row><cell lang=en>To bathe                   <cell>Pagcaligo
<row><cell lang=en>To comb                    <cell>Pagsudlay
<row><cell lang=en>To dress                   <cell>Pagvisti
<row><cell lang=en>To undress                 <cell>Paghubo
<row><cell lang=en>To know                    <cell>Pagila
<pb n=116 id=pb116><row><cell lang=en>To fear                    <cell>Pagcahadluc
<row><cell lang=en>To try                     <cell>Pagsulay
<row><cell lang=en>To love                    <cell>Paghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>To hate                    <cell>Pagcadumut
<row><cell lang=en>To <corr sic=will>want</corr>                    <cell>Pagbuut
<row><cell lang=en>To wish                    <cell>Pagtin&gtilde;uha
<row><cell lang=en>To desire                  <cell>Pagcaibog
<row><cell lang=en>To think                   <cell>Paghuna huna
<row><cell lang=en>To intend                  <cell>Pagtuyo
<row><cell lang=en>To order                   <cell>Pagsugo
<row><cell lang=en>To obey                    <cell>Pagsugot
<row><cell lang=en>To rule                    <cell>Pagcahari
<row><cell lang=en>To agree                   <cell>Pagoyon
<row><cell lang=en>To prison                  <cell>Pagbilanggo
<row><cell lang=en>To punish                  <cell>Pagcastigo
<row><cell lang=en>To judge                   <cell>Paghocom
<row><cell lang=en>To sentence                <cell>Pagsentencia
<row><cell lang=en>To seize                   <cell>Pagdacop
<row><cell lang=en>To know                    <cell>Paghibalo
<row><cell lang=en>To teach                   <cell>Pagtodlo
<row><cell lang=en>To learn                   <cell>Pagtoon
<row><cell lang=en>To study                   <cell>Pagestudio
<row><cell lang=en>To understand              <cell>Pagcasabut
<row><cell lang=en>To explain                 <cell>Pagsaysay
<row><cell lang=en>To comprehend              <cell>Pagtoquib
<row><cell lang=en>To show                    <cell>Pagpadayag
<row><cell lang=en>To read                    <cell>Pagbasa
<row><cell lang=en>To write                   <cell>Pagsulat
<row><cell lang=en>To copy                    <cell>Paghuad
<row><cell lang=en>To adore                   <cell>Pagsingba
<row><cell lang=en>To pray                    <cell>Pagampo
<pb n=117 id=pb117><row><cell lang=en>To ask                        <cell>Pagpan&gtilde;ayo
<row><cell lang=en>To entreat, to pray           <cell>Pagpan&gtilde;amuyo
<row><cell lang=en>To ask for                    <cell>Pagpanin&gtilde;il
<row><cell lang=en>To <corr sic=suplicate>supplicate</corr>                 <cell>Paghan&gtilde;yo
<row><cell lang=en>To pray                       <cell>Pagpan&gtilde;adye
<row><cell lang=en>To consider                   <cell>Pagpalamdong
<row><cell lang=en>To speak                      <cell>Pagsulti
<row><cell lang=en>To talk                       <cell>Pagpamulong
<row><cell lang=en>To carry tales                <cell>Pagcuti cuti
<row><cell lang=en>To backbite                   <cell>Paglibac
<row><cell lang=en>To slander                    <cell>Pagbutangbutang
<row><cell lang=en>To swear                      <cell>Pagpanumpa
<row><cell lang=en>To whisper                    <cell>Paghonghong
<row><cell lang=en>To say                        <cell>Pagin&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>To tell                       <cell>Pagsuguilon
<row><cell lang=en>To dispute                    <cell>Pagindig indig
<row><cell lang=en>To sew                        <cell>Pagtahi
<row><cell lang=en>To cut                        <cell>Paggunting
<row><cell lang=en>To cut out                    <cell>Pagtabas
<row><cell lang=en>To baste                      <cell>Paglagda
<row><cell lang=en>To weave                      <cell>Paghabol
<row><cell lang=en>To spin                       <cell>Paggaling
<row><cell lang=en>To dry                        <cell>Pagbulad
<row><cell lang=en>To water                      <cell>Pagbobo
<row><cell lang=en>To give                       <cell>Paghatag
<row><cell lang=en>To receive                    <cell>Pagdauat
<row><cell lang=en>To begin                      <cell>Pagsugud
<row><cell lang=en>To wait for                   <cell>Paghulat
<row><cell lang=en>To expect                     <cell>Pagpaabut
<row><cell lang=en>To bring                      <cell>Pagdala
<row><cell lang=en>To take                       <cell>Pagcoha
<pb n=118 id=pb118><row><cell lang=en>To pick up                  <cell>Pagpulot
<row><cell lang=en>To call                     <cell>Pagtauag
<row><cell lang=en>To come back                <cell>Pagpauli
<row><cell lang=en>To fill                     <cell>Pagpono
<row><cell lang=en>To pour                     <cell>Pagyabo
<row><cell lang=en>To cook                     <cell>Pagloto
<row><cell lang=en>To die                      <cell>Pagcamatay
<row><cell lang=en>To kill                     <cell>Pagpatay
<row><cell lang=en>To murder                   <cell>Pagbono
<row><cell lang=en>To do, to make              <cell>Pagbuhat
<row><cell lang=en>To doubt                    <cell>Pagduha duha
<row><cell lang=en>To hear                     <cell>Pagcadun&gtilde;ug
<row><cell lang=en>To listen                   <cell>Pagpatalinghog
<row><cell lang=en>To hope                     <cell>Paglaom
<row><cell lang=en>To laugh                    <cell>Pagcataua
<row><cell lang=en>To live                     <cell>Pagbuhi
<row><cell lang=en>To dwell                    <cell>Pagpuyo
<row><cell lang=en>To invite                   <cell>Pagabi abi
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Ta>To</corr> feel                     <cell>Pagbati
<row><cell lang=en>To find                     <cell>Pagcaplag
<row><cell lang=en>To forget                   <cell>Pagcalimot
<row><cell lang=en>To put                      <cell>Pagbutang
<row><cell lang=en>To finish                   <cell>Pagtapus. Pagtibauas
<row><cell lang=en>To preach                   <cell>Paguali
<row><cell lang=en>To deny                     <cell>Paglimod
<row><cell lang=en>To bury                     <cell>Paglobong
<row><cell lang=en>To dig                      <cell>Pagcalot
<row><cell lang=en>To dance                    <cell>Pagsayao
<row><cell lang=en>To play                     <cell>Pagdula dula
<row><cell lang=en>To swim                     <cell>Paglan&gtilde;oy
<row><cell lang=en>To run                      <cell>Pagdalagan
<pb n=119 id=pb119><row><cell lang=en>To paint                    <cell>Pagpintal
<row><cell lang=en>To print                    <cell>Pagimprenta
<row><cell lang=en>To draw                     <cell>Pagdibujo
<row><cell lang=en>To bind                     <cell>Paghanig
<row><cell lang=en>To cut                      <cell>Pagabis. Pagputul
<row><cell lang=en>To measure                  <cell>Pagsocod
<row><cell lang=en>To abandon                  <cell>Pagbia
<row><cell lang=en>To burn                     <cell>Pagcasunug
<row><cell lang=en>To embrace                  <cell>Paggacos
<row><cell lang=en>To kiss                     <cell>Paghaloc
<row><cell lang=en>To open                     <cell>Pagocab
<row><cell lang=en>To shut                     <cell>Pagtacop
<row><cell lang=en>To abuse                    <cell>Pagpatuyang
<row><cell lang=en>To accompany                <cell>Paguban
<row><cell lang=en>To counsel                  <cell>Pagsambag
<row><cell lang=en>To accuse                   <cell>Pagsumbong
<row><cell lang=en>To guess                    <cell>Pagtagna
<row><cell lang=en>To adorn                    <cell>Pagdayan dayan
<row><cell lang=en>To flatter                  <cell>Pagolog olog
<row><cell lang=en>To shave                    <cell>Pagalot
<row><cell lang=en>To loosen                   <cell>Pagloag
<row><cell lang=en>To agonize                  <cell>Paghin&gtilde;utas
<row><cell lang=en>To suffer                   <cell>Pagantos
<row><cell lang=en>To smoke                    <cell>Pagaso. Pagtabaco
</table>



<pb n=120 id=pb120>
<div1 id=s58>
<head>M&gtilde;a panigin&gtilde;nan sa nagcalain laing m&gtilde;a tiempo sa verbo.</head>


<p><hi rend=sc>Indicativo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I love God                      <cell>Aco nahagugma sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>You teach English               <cell>Icao nagatodlo <corr sic=ng>ug</corr> iningles
<row><cell lang=en>He writes a letter              <cell>Sia nagasulat ug usa ca sulat
<row><cell lang=en>We hate the sins                <cell>Quita nacadumut sa m&gtilde;a sala
<row><cell lang=en>You help the poor               <cell>Camo nanaglaban sa m&gtilde;a pobre
<row><cell lang=en>They despise the enemies        <cell>Sila nanagpasipala sa m&gtilde;a caauay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>God is loved by me              <cell><corr sic=Guihiguma>Guihigugma</corr> co ang Dios
<row><cell lang=en>English is taught by you        <cell>Guitodlo nimo ug iningles
<row><cell lang=en>A letter is written by him      <cell>Guisulat nia ug usa ca sulat
<row><cell lang=en>The sins are hated by us        <cell>Guidumtan namu ang m&gtilde;a sala
<row><cell lang=en>The poor are helped by you      <cell>Guilabanan niño ang m&gtilde;a macalolooy
<row><cell lang=en>The enemies are despised by them        <cell>Guipasipad-an nila ang m&gtilde;a caauay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=121 id=pb121><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do I love my parents?           <cell>Nahagugma ba aco sa acong m&gtilde;a guinicanan?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you teach Spanish?           <cell>Nagatodlo ca ba ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>Does he write a letter?         <cell>Nagasulat ba sia ug usa ca sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Do we hate the sins?            <cell>Nacadumut ba quita sa m&gtilde;a sala?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you help the beggars?        <cell>Nanaglaban ba camo sa m&gtilde;a paquilimos?
<row><cell lang=en>Do they despise the money?      <cell>Nanagpasipala ba sila sa salapi?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are my parents loved by me?     <cell>Guihigugma co ba ang acong m&gtilde;a guinicanan?
<row><cell lang=en>Is Spanish taught by you?       <cell>Guitodlo ba nimo ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>Is a letter written by him?     <cell>Guisulat ba nia ug usa ca sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Are the sins hated by us?       <cell>Guidumtan ba natu ang m&gtilde;a sala?
<row><cell lang=en>Are the beggars helped by you?      <cell>Guilabanan ba niño ang m&gtilde;a paquilimos?
<row><cell lang=en>Is the money despised by them?      <cell>Guipasipadan ba nila ang salapi?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I do not love the evil          <cell>Dili aco nahagugma sa pagcadautan
<row><cell lang=en>You do not teach Bisaya         <cell>Dili ca magatodlo ug binisaya
<pb n=122 id=pb122><row><cell lang=en>He does not write a book        <cell>Dili sia magasulat ug usa ca libro
<row><cell lang=en>We do not hate the enemies      <cell>Dili quita macadumut sa m&gtilde;a caauay
<row><cell lang=en>You do not help the sick        <cell>Dili camo magatabang sa m&gtilde;a masaquiton
<row><cell lang=en>They do not despise the money       <cell>Dili sila managpasipala sa salapi
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do I not love the evil?             <cell>Di ba aco nahagugma sa pagcadautan?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you not teach the lesson?        <cell>Di ba icao nagatodlo sa lesion?
<row><cell lang=en>Does he not write a news?           <cell>Di ba sia nagasulat ug usa ca noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>Do we not help the children?        <cell>Di ba quita nanagtabang sa m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you not hate the murderers?      <cell>Di ba camo nacadumut sa m&gtilde;a mamomono?
<row><cell lang=en>Do they not despise the goodness?       <cell>Di ba sila nanagpasipala sa caayo?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The friend is not loved by me       <cell>Dili co guihigugma ang amigos
<row><cell lang=en>Chinese is not taught by you        <cell>Dili mo guitodlo ug ininsic
<row><cell lang=en>A book is not written by him        <cell>Dili nia guisulat ug usa ca libro
<row><cell lang=en>Our cousin is not hated by us       <cell>Dili natu <corr sic=guiduntan>guidumtan</corr> ang atung igagao
<pb n=123 id=pb123><row><cell lang=en>The happy are not helped by you         <cell>Dili niño guilabanan ang m&gtilde;a palad-an
<row><cell lang=en>The meal is not despised by them        <cell>Dili nila guiaydan ang calanon
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Is not my father loved by me?           <cell>Di ba guihigugma co ang acong tatay?
<row><cell lang=en>Is not the grammar taught by you?       <cell>Di ba guitodlo mo ang gramática?
<row><cell lang=en>Is not a news written by him?           <cell>Di ba guisulat nia ug usa ca noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>Is not your friend hated by us?         <cell>Di ba guidumtan ta ang imong abian?
<row><cell lang=en>Are not the happy helped by you?        <cell>Di ba niño guitaban&gtilde;an ang m&gtilde;a palad-an<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Are not the rich despised by them?      <cell>Di ba nila guipasipad-an ang m&gtilde;a salapian?
</table>



<p><hi>Pretérito imperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I loved God                     <cell>Aco nahagugma sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>You taught Latin                <cell>Icao nagtodlo ug linatin
<row><cell lang=en>She washed the linen            <cell>Sia namunac sa visti
<row><cell lang=en>We spoke to him                 <cell>Quita nanagsulti cania
<row><cell lang=en>You told that                   <cell>Camo nagsuguilon niana
<row><cell lang=en>They said                       <cell>Sila nagin&gtilde;on
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>God was loved by me             <cell>Guigugma co ang Dios
<pb n=124 id=pb124><row><cell lang=en>Rhetoric was taught by you          <cell>Guitodlo nimo ang retórica
<row><cell lang=en>The linen was washed by her         <cell>Guipamunac nia ang visti
<row><cell lang=en>We were defeated by you             <cell>Guidaog came niño
<row><cell lang=en>You were bitten by the dog          <cell>Guipaac camo sa iro
<row><cell lang=en>They were whipped by the teacher    <cell>Guihampac sila sa maestro
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Did I love God?                     <cell>Nahagugma ba aco sa Dios?
<row><cell lang=en>Was Logic taught by you?            <cell>Guitodlo ba niño ug lógica?
<row><cell lang=en>He did not say so                   <cell>Uala sia mamulong niana
<row><cell lang=en>Did we not agree with you?          <cell>Uala ba came managoyon canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>The sick were not visited by you    <cell>Uala niño duaua ang m&gtilde;a masaquiton
<row><cell lang=en>Were you not abandoned by them?     <cell>Uala ba camo bia-i nila?
</table>


<p><hi>Pretérito perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have loved God                    <cell>Nahagugma na aco sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>You have opened the door            <cell>Nagocab na icao sa pulta
<pb n=125 id=pb125><row><cell lang=en>He has finished his work            <cell>Nacahuman na sia sa iyang buhat
<row><cell lang=en>We have accused you                 <cell>Nagsumbung na came canimo
<row><cell lang=en>You have guessed our mind           <cell>Nanagtagna na camo sa amung huna huna
<row><cell lang=en>They have adored the statue         <cell>Nanagsingba na sila sa larauan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have been loved by you            <cell>Guihigugma na aco nimo
<row><cell lang=en>You have been taught by me          <cell>Guitodloan co na icao
<row><cell lang=en>He has been flattered by them       <cell>Guiolog ologan na sia nila
<row><cell lang=en>We have been advised by him         <cell>Guisambagan na came nia
<row><cell lang=en>You have been shaved by the barber      <cell>Guiaguilan na camo sa mananalot
<row><cell lang=en>They have been adorned by us            <cell>Guidayan dayanan na namu sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have I loved my mother?         <cell>Nahagugma na ba aco sa acong anan?
<row><cell lang=en>You have not done anything          <cell>Uala icao magbuhat ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Has he not gone to the market?      <cell>Uala pa ba sia muadto sa tianggi?
<row><cell lang=en>Have we been afflicted by you?          <cell>Guisaquit-an ba came nimo?
<pb n=126 id=pb126><row><cell lang=en>Have you not been pleased by us?        <cell>Di ba guicalipayan camo namu?
<row><cell lang=en>They have not been regaled by me?       <cell>Uala co sila atan&gtilde;i
</table>


<p><hi>Pretérito pluscuamperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I had loved the child           <cell>Human na aco paghigugma sa bata
<row><cell lang=en>You had bought the horse        <cell>Ubus na icao pagpalit sa cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>He had sold his house           <cell>Nagbaliguia na sia sa iyang balay
<row><cell lang=en>We had changed the money        <cell>Nanagilis na quita sa salapi
<row><cell lang=en>You had let the room            <cell>Human na camo pagabang sa cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>They had paid the count         <cell>Nanagpamayad na sila sa cuenta
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The girl had been loved by me       <cell>Guihigugma co na ang bata
<row><cell lang=en>You had been chosen by him          <cell>Human na icao guipili nia
<row><cell lang=en>I had been praised by you           <cell>Guidayeg na aco nimo
<row><cell lang=en>We had been disturbed by the boys       <cell>Guisamocan na quita sa m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>You had been alarmed by the thieves     <cell>Da-an hin&gtilde;ubcan camo sa m&gtilde;a cauatan
<pb n=127 id=pb127><row><cell lang=en>They had been put into prison       <cell>Da-an guibilanggo sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Had I loved the maid?               <cell>Nahagugma na ba aco sa dalaga?
<row><cell lang=en>You had not acquired anything       <cell>Uala icao macadan&gtilde;at ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>He had not been overtaken by you        <cell>Uala nimo apasa sia
<row><cell lang=en>Had we not been fed by the people?      <cell>Uala ba quita guipanagmuhi sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>Had you not been protected by the rich?     <cell>Uala ba camo panglabanan sa m&gtilde;a salapian?
<row><cell lang=en>Had they menaced the bad boys?          <cell>Nanaghulga ba silang da-an sa m&gtilde;a bata n&gtilde;a dautan?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro.</hi><note n=1 lang=ceb><p>Tacus man n&gtilde;a hibaloan sa magbabasa n&gtilde;a may duha ca agui sa paghimo niining tiempo ug sa uban pa n&gtilde;a arang maquita sa ubus n&gtilde;a magadala sa m&gtilde;a auxiliar <hi>will</hi> ug <hi>shall</hi>, <hi>would</hi> ug <hi>should</hi>. Cun sa atung pagpamulong mao day tuyo natu ang pagpahibalo sa usa ca buhat cun tuman n&gtilde;a umalabut, atong gamiton ang nahaunang agui; ug ang icaduha cun magpadayag quita sa atung pagbuut n&gtilde;a matuman gayud ang buhat n&gtilde;a ipahibalo ta sa atung pagpamulong. Ang tolomanon sa pagcahimo sa m&gtilde;a tiempo n&gtilde;a magadala nianang m&gtilde;a auxiliar mao ang sumunud:

<p><table>
<row role=label><cell cols=2>Nahaunang agui            <cell cols=2>Icaduhang agui
<row><cell lang=en>I shall love    <cell>We shall love         <cell>I will love      <cell>We will love
<row><cell lang=en>You will love   <cell>You will love         <cell>You shall love   <cell>You shall love
<row><cell lang=en>He will love    <cell>They will love        <cell>He shall love    <cell>They shall love
</table></note>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall love you        <cell>Aco mahagugma canimo
<pb n=128 id=pb128><row><cell lang=en>You will walk this evening      <cell>Icao magasodoy sodoy carong hapon
<row><cell lang=en>He will announce his goods      <cell>Sia magamantala sa iyang m&gtilde;a manggad
<row><cell lang=en>We shall <corr sic=extinguished>extinguish</corr> the fire      <cell>Quita magapalong sa calayo
<row><cell lang=en>You will put out the candle     <cell>Camo magapalong sa candila
<row><cell lang=en>They will plough the field      <cell>Sila magadaro sa baul
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall be loved by my sister       <cell>Higugmaon aco sa acong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>You will be appreciated by me       <cell>Palangaon co icao
<row><cell lang=en>He will be punished by the teacher      <cell>Castigohon sia sa maestro
<row><cell lang=en>We shall be blessed by the good         <cell>Bendicionan came sa m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>You will be tormented by the devil      <cell>Panagsaquiton camo sa yaua
<row><cell lang=en>They will be terrified by God           <cell>Calisan&gtilde;an sila sa Dios
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I love my son?                    <cell>Mahagugma ba aco sa acong anac?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you not be inquired by any one?    <cell>Dili pagsusihon ca sa bisan quinsa?
<row><cell lang=en>Will he dine at twelve o&apos;clock?         <cell>Maniodto ba sia sa a las doce?
<pb n=129 id=pb129><row><cell lang=en>We shall not kneel on the ground        <cell>Dili came mulohod sa yuta
<row><cell lang=en>You will not learn the lesson           <cell>Dili camo macatoon sa lesion
<row><cell lang=en>They will be taught English             <cell>Todloan sila ug iningles
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I will have loved my brother        <cell>Aco mahagugma na sa acong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>You shall have finished the letter      <cell>Icao magasulat na sa sulat
<row><cell lang=en>He shall have made the <corr sic=trowsers>trousers</corr>           <cell>Magabuhat na siya sa calzones
<row><cell lang=en>We will have given our money            <cell>Magahatag na came sa amung salapi
<row><cell lang=en>You shall have got the book         <cell>Macadan&gtilde;at na camo sa libro
<row><cell lang=en>They shall have received the newspaper          <cell>Madauat na nila ang mantala-an
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I will have been loved by him           <cell>Human na aco higugma-a nia
<row><cell lang=en>You shall have been forgiven by me      <cell>Ubus na icao pasaylo-a naco
<row><cell lang=en>It shall have been purchased by the butcher         <cell>Human na palita sia sa magbaliliguia ug carne
<row><cell lang=en>We will have been informed by the lawyer            <cell>Human na came sambag-i sa abogado
<pb n=130 id=pb130><row><cell lang=en>You shall have been answered by her         <cell>Pagabaslan na camo nia
<row><cell lang=en>They shall have been rewarded by God        <cell>Human na sila pagabaslan sa Dios
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I have loved the sin?                 <cell>Mahagugma na aco cahá sa sala?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have been cured by the doctor?     <cell>Tambalan na icao cahá sa médico?
<row><cell lang=en>Will he not have been corrected by the Father?          <cell>Uala pa ba sia badlon&gtilde;a sa Pare?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall we not have invited my friends?       <cell>Di ba magaabi abi na came sa acong m&gtilde;a higala?
<row><cell lang=en>You shall not have come at five o&apos;clock     <cell>Uala pa camo muanhi sa a las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>They shall not have been awaken at six o&apos;clock      <cell>Uala pa sila pucaua sa a las seis
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Imperativo.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Love the study          <cell>Maghigugma ca sa pagtoon
<row><cell lang=en>Let him love the poor       <cell>Mahagugma sia sa m&gtilde;a mahan&gtilde;ul
<row><cell lang=en>Let us love God         <cell>Maghigugma quita sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>Love the good deeds         <cell>Maghigugma camo sa m&gtilde;a buhat n&gtilde;a maayo
<pb n=131 id=pb131><row><cell lang=en>Let them love the Fathers           <cell>Maghigugma sila sa m&gtilde;a Pare
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Be loved by me              <cell>Higugmaon co icao
<row><cell lang=en>Let him be loved by you     <cell>Higugmaon mo sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let us be loved by them     <cell>Higugmaon came nila
<row><cell lang=en>Be loved by her             <cell>Higugmaon camo nia
<row><cell lang=en>Let them be loved by you    <cell>Higugmaon niño sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t love                  <cell>Dili ca maghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>Let him not love            <cell>Dili sia maghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>Let us not love             <cell>Dili quita maghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t love                  <cell>Dili camo maghigugma
<row><cell lang=en>Let them not love           <cell>Dili maghigugma sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Subjuntivo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may love                         <cell>N&gtilde;a mahagugma aco
<row><cell lang=en>That you may travel by land             <cell>N&gtilde;a magaviaje ca sa mamala
<row><cell lang=en>That he may walk this morning           <cell>N&gtilde;a magalacat sia carong buntag
<row><cell lang=en>That we may ride this evening           <cell>N&gtilde;a magcabayo came carong hapon
<pb n=132 id=pb132><row><cell lang=en>That you may drive this evening         <cell>N&gtilde;a magcarruage camo carong gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>That they may run                       <cell>N&gtilde;a mudalagan sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may be loved by them             <cell>N&gtilde;a higugmaon aco nila
<row><cell lang=en>That you may be recompensed for your work       <cell>N&gtilde;a baslan ca tun&gtilde;ud sa imong buhat
<row><cell lang=en>That he may be esteemed by every body           <cell>N&gtilde;a higugmaon sia sa n&gtilde;atanan
<row><cell lang=en>That we may be ordered by you                   <cell>N&gtilde;a sogoon came nimo
<row><cell lang=en>That you may be blamed by men                   <cell>N&gtilde;a sauayon camo sa m&gtilde;a tao
<row><cell lang=en>That they may be favored for the trouble        <cell>N&gtilde;a taban&gtilde;an sila tun&gtilde;ud sa cabudlay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may not love that                        <cell>N&gtilde;a dili aco mahagugma niana
<row><cell lang=en>That you may not go up                          <cell>N&gtilde;a dili ca musaca
<row><cell lang=en>That he may not go out                          <cell>N&gtilde;a dili sia mugoa
<row><cell lang=en>That we may not be deceived by any one          <cell>N&gtilde;a dili palimbon&gtilde;on came sa bisan quinsa
<row><cell lang=en>That you may not be humbled by your comrades        <cell>N&gtilde;a dili camo paubson sa iñong m&gtilde;a isigcain&gtilde;on
<pb n=133 id=pb133><row><cell lang=en>That they may not be found by their parents         <cell>N&gtilde;a dili hipalgan sila sa ilang m&gtilde;a guinicanan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito imperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I might love the infant                <cell>N&gtilde;a mahagugma aco unta sa bata
<row><cell lang=en>That you might burn the house               <cell>N&gtilde;a macasunug ca unta sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>That he might stay at home                  <cell>N&gtilde;a mapalibin sia unta sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>That we might think of you                  <cell>N&gtilde;a magahunahuna came unta canimo
<row><cell lang=en>That you might understand what I am speaking        <cell>N&gtilde;a macasabut camo unta sa acong guipamulong
<row><cell lang=en>That they might begin their work            <cell>N&gtilde;a magasugud sila unta sa ilang buhat
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I might be seen by the man             <cell>N&gtilde;a quitaon aco unta sa tao
<row><cell lang=en>That you might be excused from this work        <cell>N&gtilde;a gauson ca unta niining buhat
<row><cell lang=en>That he might be called to that employment      <cell>N&gtilde;a taga-an sia unta nianang catungdanan
<row><cell lang=en>That we might be saved from shipwreck           <cell>N&gtilde;a luason came unta sa pagcalunud
<pb n=134 id=pb134><row><cell lang=en>That you might be noted by the servant          <cell>N&gtilde;a oquitan camo unta sa sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>That they might be changed                      <cell>N&gtilde;a ilisan sila unta
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I might not love the playing               <cell>N&gtilde;a dili aco unta mahagugma sa dula-an
<row><cell lang=en>That you might not depart                       <cell>N&gtilde;a dili ca unta muguican
<row><cell lang=en>That he might not know that                     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili sia unta mahibalo niana
<row><cell lang=en>That we might not die                           <cell>N&gtilde;a dili came unta mamatay
<row><cell lang=en>That you might not wait                         <cell>N&gtilde;a dili camo unta magahulat
<row><cell lang=en>That they might not be commanded by any body        <cell>N&gtilde;a dili sugo-on sila unta sa bisan quinsa
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Condicional.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I should go to Manila               <cell>Muadto aco unta sa Manila
<row><cell lang=en>You would return home               <cell>Mupauli ca caha sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>He would work                       <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali magtrabajo sia
<row><cell lang=en>We should build the house           <cell>Magatocod quita unta sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>You would leave the town            <cell>Muhalin camo caha sa longsod
<pb n=135 id=pb135><row><cell lang=en>They would write a letter           <cell>Magasulat sila daguay ug usa <corr sic=sa>ca</corr> sulat
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may have bought a horse          <cell>N&gtilde;a mupalit na aco unta ug usa ca cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have loved the friends     <cell>N&gtilde;a mahagugma na icao unta sa m&gtilde;a abian
<row><cell lang=en>That he may have walked in the garden       <cell>N&gtilde;a magasodoy sodoy na sia unta sa tanaman
<row><cell lang=en>That we may have concealed the truth        <cell>N&gtilde;a magtago quita unta sa camatooran
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have read the book             <cell>N&gtilde;a magbasa na camo unta sa libro
<row><cell lang=en>That they may have started this evening     <cell>N&gtilde;a muguican na sila unta carong hapon
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may have been loved by the Father            <cell>N&gtilde;a higugmaon na aco unta sa Padre
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have been compelled to go to school    <cell>N&gtilde;a lugson ca unta sa pagadto sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>That he may not have been invited to the supper     <cell>N&gtilde;a uala pa sia unta abi abiha sa panihapon
<row><cell lang=en>That we may not have been called by you             <cell>N&gtilde;a uala came unta taoga niño
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have consented to it                   <cell>N&gtilde;a nanagoyon da camo unta niana
<pb n=136 id=pb136><row><cell lang=en>That they may have confided in that friend          <cell>N&gtilde;a nanagsalig na unta sila nianang higala
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito pluscuamperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I might have loved God                       <cell>Cun mahagugma pa aco unta sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>If you should have liked fruit                  <cell>Cun mahagugma pa icao unta ug bon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>If he would have wanted anything                <cell>Cun magaquinahanglan pa sia unta ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>That we might have advised the sinner           <cell>N&gtilde;a magasambag came unta sa <corr sic=macasala>macasasala</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>If you might have arrived to the port           <cell>Cun macaabut pa unta camo sa laoyganan
<row><cell lang=en>If they should have amused themselves           <cell>Cun magalin&gtilde;ao lin&gtilde;ao pa sila unta
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I should have been joked by the boys         <cell>Cun tiao tiaoan pa aco unta sa m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>If you would not have been talked by the tale-bearer        <cell>Cun dili pamolon&gtilde;an pa icao unta sa cuticutihan
<row><cell lang=en>If he would not have trusted to any one his money           <cell>Ug dili pa sia magpabantay sa bisan quinsa sa iyang salapi
<row><cell lang=en>That we might have been accompanied by the children         <cell>N&gtilde;a ubanan pa came unta sa m&gtilde;a bata
<pb n=137 id=pb137><row><cell lang=en>If you might not have come so soon              <cell>Ug dili pa icao muanhi sa in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a madali
<row><cell lang=en>If they would have been conducted to their house        <cell>Cun ihatod pa sila unta sa ilang balay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I will love the work                 <cell>Cun mahagugma aco unta sa buhat
<row><cell lang=en>If you shall come back          <cell>Cun bumalic pa icao
<row><cell lang=en>If he shall stay at home        <cell>Ug pabilin pa sia sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>If we will sit down             <cell>Cun mulingcod quita unta
<row><cell lang=en>If you will stand               <cell>Ug mutindog pa camo
<row><cell lang=en>If they shall remain            <cell>Cun pabilin pa sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I will be loved by her       <cell>Cun paghigugmaon pa aco nia
<row><cell lang=en>If you will not be spoken by me         <cell>Cun dili pa icao pamulon&gtilde;an co
<row><cell lang=en>If he shall not to out          <cell>Cun dili sia mugoa
<row><cell lang=en>If we will be rewarded by the master            <cell>Ug dili pa came basli sa agalon
<row><cell lang=en>If you will not learn by heart                  <cell>Ug dili camo unta magasaolo
<row><cell lang=en>If they will not be accused by the teacher          <cell>Cun dili isumbung sila unta sa magtotoon
</table>


<pb n=138 id=pb138><p><hi>Futuro perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I will have loved the books              <cell>Cun mahagugma na aco unta sa m&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>If you shall have killed the goat           <cell>Cun muihao na icao unta sa canding
<row><cell lang=en>If he shall have placed the pictures        <cell>Cun magabutang na sia unta sa m&gtilde;a cuadro
<row><cell lang=en>If we will have repeated the lesson         <cell>Cun magasubli quita unta sa paghatag sa lesion
<row><cell lang=en>If you will have returned home              <cell>Cun mupauli na camo unta sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>If they will have ruled the city            <cell>Cun managsugo na unta sila sa ciudad
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I shall have been loved by my wife       <cell>Cun higugmaon pa aco unta sa acong asaua
<row><cell lang=en>If you shall not have been despised by the husband          <cell>Cun dili pa icao pasipad-an unta sa bana
<row><cell lang=en>If he will not have included the rice       <cell>Cun dili pa sia muipon unta sa bugas
<row><cell lang=en>If we shall have been pleased by men        <cell>Cun guihimuutan na quita unta sa m&gtilde;a tao
<row><cell lang=en>If you will not have smoked a cigar         <cell>Ug dili pa camo magtabaco ug usa ca tinustus
<row><cell lang=en>If they will not have finished their work       <cell>Cun dili pa sila macatapus sa ilang buhat
</table>




<pb n=139 id=pb139>
<div1 id=s59>
<head>Ang verbo TO HAVE.</head>


<p><hi rend=sc>Indicativo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have the pen              <cell>Ania man canaco ang pluma
<row><cell lang=en>You have the inkstand       <cell>Na-a canimo ang tintero
<row><cell lang=en>He has the paper            <cell>Tua cania ang papel
<row><cell lang=en>We have the pencil          <cell>Ania canatu ang lapis
<row><cell lang=en>You have the ruler          <cell>Na-a caniño ang regla
<row><cell lang=en>They have the penholder     <cell>Tua canila ang mango
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have I a book?              <cell>Dinhi ba canaco ug usa ca libro?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a penknife?        <cell>Diha ba canimo ug usa ca cortaplumas?
<row><cell lang=en>Has he a letter?            <cell>Didto ba cania ug usa ca sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Have we ink?                <cell>Duna bay amung tinta?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you wafers?            <cell>Duna bay iñong m&gtilde;a oblea?
<row><cell lang=en>Have they copybooks?        <cell>Duna bay ilang m&gtilde;a cuaderno?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have I not any wine?        <cell>Uala ba acoy vino?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you no butter?         <cell>Uala ca ba ug mantequilla?
<pb n=140 id=pb140><row><cell lang=en>Has he no bread?           <cell>Uala ba siay pan?
<row><cell lang=en>Have we not any milk?      <cell>Uala ba quita ug gatas?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you not any beer?     <cell>Uala ba camo ing cerveza?
<row><cell lang=en>Have they not any meal?    <cell>Uala ba sila ing calanon?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have no meat             <cell>Uala acoy carne
<row><cell lang=en>You have not any fruit     <cell>Uala icao ing bon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>He has no water            <cell>Uala siay tubig
<row><cell lang=en>We have no dinner          <cell>Uala came ing paniodto
<row><cell lang=en>You have no viand          <cell>Uala camo ing sud-an
<row><cell lang=en>They have no supper        <cell>Uala silay panihapon
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito imperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I had a fork               <cell>Dinhi canaco ug usa tenedor
<row><cell lang=en>You had the knife          <cell>Diha canimo ang cuchillo
<row><cell lang=en>Had I the spoon?           <cell>Dinhi ba canaco ang cuchara?
<row><cell lang=en>Had you a plate?           <cell>Diha ba canimo ug usa ca pinggan<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>He had not a glass         <cell>Uala man cania ug usa ca vaso
<row><cell lang=en>We had no spoons           <cell>Uala man came ug m&gtilde;a cuchara
<row><cell lang=en>Had you no knives?         <cell>Uala ba camo ug m&gtilde;a cuchillo?
<row><cell lang=en>Had they no glasses?       <cell>Uala ba sila ing m&gtilde;a vaso?
</table>


<pb n=141 id=pb141><p><hi>Pretérito perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have had gold                 <cell>Dinhi na canaco ug bulauan
<row><cell lang=en>You have had silver             <cell>Diha na canimo ug salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Have you not had the money?     <cell>Uala na ba canimo angsalapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Has he not had the brass?       <cell>Uala na ba cania ang bronce?
<row><cell lang=en>Has she had any sugar?          <cell>Diha ba cania ug azucar?
<row><cell lang=en>Have we had any rice?           <cell>Dinhi ba canamu ug bugas?
<row><cell lang=en>You have not had tobacco        <cell>Uala diha caniño ug tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>They have not had cocoa-nuts    <cell>Uala sila ing m&gtilde;a lubi
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito pluscuamperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I had had the bottle            <cell>Da-an dinhi canaco ang botella
<row><cell lang=en>You had had the cup             <cell>Da-an diha canimo ang copa
<row><cell lang=en>He had not had the napkin       <cell>Uala didto cania ang servilleta
<row><cell lang=en>He had not had the table-cloth  <cell>Uala cania ang manteles
<pb n=142 id=pb142><row><cell lang=en>Had the boy had the tea-pot?    <cell>Didto ba sa bata ang sudlanan sa sha?
<row><cell lang=en>Had we had the coffee-pot?      <cell>Dinhi ba canamu ang sudlanan sa cape?
<row><cell lang=en>Had you not had the dishes?     <cell>Uala ba caniño sa caniadto ang m&gtilde;a pinggan?
<row><cell lang=en>Had they not had the cup?       <cell>Uala ba canila n&gtilde;a da-an ang caldohan?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall have maize              <cell>Aco aduna man ug mais
<row><cell lang=en>You will have some millet       <cell>Icao aduna man ug daua
<row><cell lang=en>He will have some wheat         <cell>Sia aduna man ug trigo
<row><cell lang=en>He will have some bananas       <cell>Sia aduna ug m&gtilde;a saguing
<row><cell lang=en>The tree will have some fruit       <cell>Ang cahuy mamon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have the pears         <cell>Aduna man quita ug m&gtilde;a peras
<row><cell lang=en>You will have the plums         <cell>Aduna camo ug m&gtilde;a ciruelas
<row><cell lang=en>They will have the apples       <cell>Aduna man sila ug m&gtilde;a manzana
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall not have a horse        <cell>Dili aco muangcon sa usa ca cabayo
<row><cell lang=en>You will have no dogs           <cell>Dili ca aduna ing m&gtilde;a iro
<pb n=143 id=pb143><row><cell lang=en>He will have no cows             <cell>Dili sia muiya ug m&gtilde;a vaca
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have no cats            <cell>Dili quita aduna ing m&gtilde;a iring
<row><cell lang=en>They will not have any bulls     <cell>Dili sila aduna ing m&gtilde;a toro
<row><cell lang=en>You will not have goats          <cell>Dili camo muangcon ug m&gtilde;a canding
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I have the umbrella?       <cell>Dinhi ba canaco oña ang payong?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall you have a stick?          <cell>Duna ba oña canimo ug usa ca bastón?
<row><cell lang=en>Will he have the chains?         <cell>Dauaton ba nia ang m&gtilde;a talicala?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall we not have the watch?     <cell>Dili dauaton ta ang horasan?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall you not have any rings?    <cell>Uala oña caniño ug m&gtilde;a singsing?
<row><cell lang=en>Will they have no spectacles?    <cell>Uala sila oña ug anteojos?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall have had a hen           <cell>Dinhi na canaco ug usa ca himun&gtilde;a-an
<row><cell lang=en>You will have had no chickens    <cell>Uala na canimo ug m&gtilde;a piso
<row><cell lang=en>Will he have had the cock?       <cell>Diha na ba cania ang sonoy?
<pb n=144 id=pb144><row><cell lang=en>Will she not have had the duck?     <cell>Di ba didto na cania ang itic?
<row><cell lang=en>Will the girl have had the bird?        <cell>Di ba muangcon n&gtilde;a da-an ang bata sa langgam?
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have had the goose         <cell>Dinhi na canaco ang gaquet
<row><cell lang=en>You will have had the pigeon        <cell>Diha na caniño ang salampati
<row><cell lang=en>They will not have had a canary     <cell>Uala na canila ug usa ca canario
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Imperativo.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have patience               <cell>Magantos ca
<row><cell lang=en>Let him have charity        <cell>Maghigugma sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let us have money           <cell>Magpatigayon quita ug salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Have kindness               <cell>Malooy camo
<row><cell lang=en>Let them have prudence      <cell>Magbuutan sila
<row><cell lang=en>Have no pride               <cell>Dili ca magpalabi labi
<row><cell lang=en>Have no fear                <cell>Dili ca mahadluc
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Subjuntivo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may have a house         <cell>N&gtilde;a dinhi canaco ug usa ca balay
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have a sowing      <cell>N&gtilde;a dunay imo ug usa ca baul
<pb n=145 id=pb145><row><cell lang=en>That he may have a tree                 <cell>N&gtilde;a aduna sia ug usa ca cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>That she may not have a garden          <cell>N&gtilde;a uala cania ug usa ca tanaman
<row><cell lang=en>That the child may have the flowers     <cell>N&gtilde;a didto sa bata ang m&gtilde;a bulac
<row><cell lang=en>That we may not have a bouquet          <cell>N&gtilde;a uala came ug usa ca pong-pong
<row><cell lang=en>That you may have no blossoms           <cell>N&gtilde;a uala caniño ug m&gtilde;a bulac
<row><cell lang=en>That they may have buds                 <cell>N&gtilde;a didto canila ug m&gtilde;a by-os
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I might have father                <cell>N&gtilde;a duna acoy unta ug amahan
<row><cell lang=en>That you might not have mother          <cell>N&gtilde;a uala unta icao ug inahan
<row><cell lang=en>That he might have no cousins           <cell>N&gtilde;a uala unta siay m&gtilde;a igagao
<row><cell lang=en>That she might have children            <cell>N&gtilde;a duna unta siay m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>That it might have feathers             <cell>N&gtilde;a duna unta sia ug m&gtilde;a balhibo
<row><cell lang=en>That we might not have any relations        <cell>N&gtilde;a uala unta came ug m&gtilde;a caubanan
<row><cell lang=en>That you might have a sister            <cell>N&gtilde;a dunay unta niño ug usa ca igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>That they might have no brothers        <cell>N&gtilde;a uala unta silay m&gtilde;a igso-on
</table>


<pb n=146 id=pb146><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I should have a billet                  <cell>Dinhi canaco caha ug usa ca billete
<row><cell lang=en>You would have a cup of whisky          <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali diha canimo ug usa ca copa n&gtilde;a whisky
<row><cell lang=en>He would have vinegar                   <cell>Didto cania unta ug suca
<row><cell lang=en>He would not have any tea               <cell>Dili sia aduna unta ing sha
<row><cell lang=en>Peter would have coffee                 <cell>Si Pedro duna caha ug café
<row><cell lang=en>We should have milk                     <cell>Quita dunay caha ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>You would have broth                    <cell>Camo may caha ing sabao
<row><cell lang=en>They would have some liquor             <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali may sila ug licor
</table>


<p>Dili ibutang co ang ubang m&gtilde;a tiempo niining verbo ug sa magasunud cay guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a dili na quinahanglan sa human co pagsulat sa n&gtilde;atanan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a tiempo sa activa ug pasiva n&gtilde;a mahimo man sa m&gtilde;a auxiliar <hi>to have</hi> ug <hi>to be</hi>.



<div1 id=s60>
<head>Ang verbo TO BE.</head>


<p><hi rend=sc>Indicativo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am a workman              <cell>Mamomoo man aco
<row><cell lang=en>You are a servant           <cell>Sologo-on man icao
<row><cell lang=en>He is a butcher             <cell>Magiihao man sia
<row><cell lang=en>We are merchants            <cell>Magbabaliguia man quita
<pb n=147 id=pb147><row><cell lang=en>You are fishers             <cell>Mananagat man camo
<row><cell lang=en>They are barbers            <cell>Mananalot man sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Am I good?                  <cell>Maayo ba aco?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you bad?                <cell>Dautan ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he prudent?              <cell>Buutan ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Are we sinners?             <cell>Macasasala ba quita?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you old?                <cell>Tigulang ba camo?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they young?             <cell>Batanon ba sila?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am not a tailor                       <cell>Dili man aco mananahi
<row><cell lang=en>You are not a soldier                   <cell>Dili icao soldado
<row><cell lang=en>He is not a sailor                      <cell>Dili man sia magsasacay
<row><cell lang=en>We are not carpenters                   <cell>Dili man cameng m&gtilde;a panday
<row><cell lang=en>You are not shoemakers                  <cell>Dili camong m&gtilde;a zapatero
<row><cell lang=en>They are not waiters                    <cell>Dili mang silang m&gtilde;a bata bata
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Am I not a teacher?                     <cell>Dili ba aco magtoto-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you not a professor?                <cell>Di ba icao magtotodlo?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he not a priest?                     <cell>Di ba pare sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Are we not doctors?                     <cell>Di ba cameng m&gtilde;a médico?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you not lawyers?                    <cell>Di ba m&gtilde;a abogado camo?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they not policemen?                 <cell>Di ba silang m&gtilde;a polis?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>



<pb n=148 id=pb148><p><hi>Pretérito imperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I was sick yesterday                        <cell>Masaquit aco cahapon
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="You were">He was</corr> not well last week               <cell>Masaquit sia sa usang semana
<row><cell lang=en>Was he indisposed last night?               <cell>Nagadaot ba sia gabi-i?
<row><cell lang=en>Was she not unwell last year?               <cell>Di ba salaquit-an sia sa usang tuig?
<row><cell lang=en>The boy was very sick at the beginning of the month         <cell>Nasaquit man caayo ang bata sa sinugdan sa bulan
<row><cell lang=en>We were well the day before yesterday               <cell>Mapiscay man came sa usang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Were you not last month in good health?             <cell>Di ba mapiscay camo sa bulan n&gtilde;a miagui?
<row><cell lang=en>They were not ill on Sunday                         <cell>Uala sila magmasaquit sa Domingo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have been fatigued this morning               <cell>Guicapuyan aco ganina sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Have you been tired?                            <cell>Guicapuyan ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>He has not been rich                            <cell>Uala sia magsalapian
<row><cell lang=en>Has she not been poor?                          <cell>Di ba sia macalolooy n&gtilde;a da-an?
<row><cell lang=en>The servant has been prudent till now           <cell>Mabuutan man ang sologo-on cutub caron
<row><cell lang=en>Have we not been diligent?                      <cell>Uala ba came magmatinumanon?
<pb n=149 id=pb149><row><cell lang=en>You have been obedient                          <cell>Masinogtanon man camo
<row><cell lang=en>They have not been grateful                     <cell>Uala sila magmatalamdon
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito pluscuamperfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Had I not been happy?                           <cell>Uala ba aco magpalad-an?
<row><cell lang=en>You had been formerly unhappy                   <cell>Icao ualay palad sa caniadto
<row><cell lang=en>Had he been faithful?                           <cell>Saliganan ba siang da-an?
<row><cell lang=en>She had been ungrateful                         <cell>Dili man sia matalamdon sa caniadto
<row><cell lang=en>The woman had not been careful                  <cell>Ang babaye uala magmabinantayon
<row><cell lang=en>Had we been careless?                           <cell>Tigayad ba came?
<row><cell lang=en>You had been unfortunate                        <cell>Macalolooy man camong da-an
<row><cell lang=en>They had not been fortunate                     <cell>Da-an ualay palad sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall be a good man                           <cell>Magmaayong tao aco
<row><cell lang=en>You will be a bad boy                           <cell>Magdautan ca n&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>He will not be a kind man                       <cell>Dili sia magmaloloyon n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Will she be an affable girl?                    <cell>Magnaya-nayaon n&gtilde;a bata ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Will not Gregory be a polite comrade?           <cell>Dili ba magmatinahoron n&gtilde;a cauban si Gregorio?
<pb n=150 id=pb150><row><cell lang=en>We shall not be physicians                      <cell>Dili came magmédico
<row><cell lang=en>You will not be pharmacists                     <cell>Camo dili magboticario
<row><cell lang=en>They will be scholars                           <cell>Magtinonan man sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Futuro perfecto.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall have been weak                          <cell>Nagmaluyahon aco caha
<row><cell lang=en>You will have been strong                       <cell>Nagmaisug ca man caha
<row><cell lang=en>He will have been idle                          <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali nagtapolan sia
<row><cell lang=en>Will he have been lovely?                       <cell>Naghiligugmaon ba sia caiha?
<row><cell lang=en>Will not Mary have been assiduous?              <cell>Uala ba caha magmatinumanon si María?
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have been lying                        <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali bacacon came
<row><cell lang=en>You will not have been guilty                   <cell>Uala camo magmalapason
<row><cell lang=en>They will have been merry                       <cell>Magmalipayon man sila daguay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi rend=sc>Imperativo.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Be pious                <cell>Mapuan&gtilde;urun ca
<row><cell lang=en>Let him be devout       <cell>Magdevotos sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let us be generous      <cell>Maghalatagon quita
<row><cell lang=en>Be grave                <cell>Magmaligdong camo
<row><cell lang=en>Let them be discreet    <cell>Magbuutan sila
</table>


<milestone unit=tb>


<pb n=151 id=pb151><p><hi rend=sc>Subjuntivo.</hi>

<p><hi>Presente.</hi>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I may be fearful           <cell>N&gtilde;a mahadlucon aco
<row><cell lang=en>That you may not be boaster     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili ca maandacon
<row><cell lang=en>That he may be <corr sic=mercyful>merciful</corr>      <cell>N&gtilde;a manguilooyan sia
<row><cell lang=en>That she may not be foolish     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili mabuang sia
<row><cell lang=en>That Raymund may be docile      <cell>N&gtilde;a masinogtanon si Ramón
<row><cell lang=en>That we may not be haughty      <cell>N&gtilde;a dili quita palabilabihon
<row><cell lang=en>That you may be courteous       <cell>N&gtilde;a maabiabihon camo
<row><cell lang=en>That they may not be rascal     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili tampalasan sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<p><hi>Pretérito.</hi>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That I might be modest              <cell>N&gtilde;a magmaligdong aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>That you might not be a gambler     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili ca unta mahimong sugarol
<row><cell lang=en>That he might not be a drunkard     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili sia unta palahubog
<row><cell lang=en>That she might be cautious          <cell>N&gtilde;a magbalantay sia unta
<pb n=152 id=pb152><row><cell lang=en>That the boy might not be showy     <cell>N&gtilde;a dili unta parayegon ang bata
<row><cell lang=en>That we might be humble             <cell>N&gtilde;a mapaubsanon unta came
<row><cell lang=en>That you might not be crafty        <cell>N&gtilde;a dili mabudhion unta camo
<row><cell lang=en>That they might not be cruel        <cell>N&gtilde;a dili unta magmapintas sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I should be admired                 <cell>Mahatin&gtilde;ala aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>You would not be angry              <cell>Dili ca maligutgut caha
<row><cell lang=en>He would be deceitful               <cell>Magalimbong sia unta
<row><cell lang=en>She would not be disobedient        <cell>Dili sia unta masuquihon
<row><cell lang=en>Emanuel would not be a censurer     <cell>Dili malibacon unta si Manuel
<row><cell lang=en>We should be sad                    <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon unta quita
<row><cell lang=en>You would not be rash               <cell>Dili camo unta man&gtilde;ahason
<row><cell lang=en>They would be tolerant              <cell><corr sic=Tigayad>Tigpasagad</corr> man sila unta
</table>



<pb n=153 id=pb153>
<div1 id=s61>
<head>Lain laing m&gtilde;a pagpamulong.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Sit down                         <cell>Mulingcod ca
<row><cell lang=en>Lie down                         <cell>Magligad ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go to bed                        <cell>Muhigda ca
<row><cell lang=en>Stay here                        <cell>Pabilin ca
<row><cell lang=en>Stop                             <cell>Muhunung ca
<row><cell lang=en>Stand                            <cell>Mutingdug ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go to sleep                      <cell>Matolog ca
<row><cell lang=en>Keep still                       <cell>Magpuyo ca
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Go on                            <cell>Padayon ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go in. Come in                   <cell>Musulud ca<note n=1>Mao day usa ca agui sa paghubad sa binisaya nianang duha ca pagpamulong n&gtilde;a iningles; ug quinahanglan gayud n&gtilde;a hibaloan sa magbabasa ang tolomanon sa paggamit nila. Cun diha ca sa salas, pananglet, ug muanha usa ca tao sa pulta, pasudlon mo sia sa pagin&gtilde;on: <hi>come in</hi>; apan cun didto sa goa camong duha ug buut ca magpasulud cania, ingna: <hi>go in</hi>. Mao man usab ang tolomanon n&gtilde;a sondon mo sa m&gtilde;a pagpamulong n&gtilde;a sumunud: <hi>go down</hi>, <hi>come down</hi>, &amp;. Cun ang tao n&gtilde;a pamolon&gtilde;an mo tua sa itaas sa balay, pananglet, pacanaogon mo sia sa pagin&gtilde;on: <hi>go down</hi>; apan ug didto na icao sa ubus ug sia sa ita-as, ingna sia: <hi>come down</hi>.</note>
<row><cell lang=en>Go down. Come down               <cell>Manaog ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go up. Come up                   <cell>Musaca ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go out. Come out                 <cell>Mugoa ca
<row><cell lang=en>Come back                        <cell>Mupauli ca
<row><cell lang=en>Come                             <cell>Umari ca. Dali na
<row><cell lang=en>Go away                          <cell>Pahaua
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>See                              <cell>Tanaua. Soln&gtilde;a
<pb n=154 id=pb154><row><cell lang=en>Think                         <cell>Huna huna-a
<row><cell lang=en>Speak                         <cell>Magsulti ca
<row><cell lang=en>Cry                           <cell>Magtiabao ca
<row><cell lang=en>Listen                        <cell>Mamati ca
<row><cell lang=en>Take care                     <cell>Bantay ca
<row><cell lang=en>Talk                          <cell>Mamulong ca
<row><cell lang=en>Hear                          <cell>Paninghod ca
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Put on the hat                <cell>Magcalo ca
<row><cell lang=en>Put on the trousers           <cell>Magcalsones ca
<row><cell lang=en>Put on the shirt              <cell>Magsinina ca
<row><cell lang=en>Put on the stockings          <cell>Magmedias ca
<row><cell lang=en>Take off the neckerchief      <cell>Hocasa ang paño
<row><cell lang=en>Take off the shoes            <cell>Holbota ang sapin
<row><cell lang=en>Take off the hat              <cell>Palusa ang calo
<row><cell lang=en>Take off the drawers          <cell>Huboa ang calzoncillos
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do you see the flower?                  <cell>Naquita mo ba ang bulac?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you look for money?                  <cell>Nan&gtilde;ita ca ba ug salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Does he look at the child?              <cell>Nanulong ba sia sa bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Does he know that man?                  <cell>Naila ba nia canang tao?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you love me?                         <cell>Guihigugma ba aco nimo?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you understand me?                   <cell>Nacasabut ca ba canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you think of your friends?           <cell>Nagapalandung ca ba sa imong m&gtilde;a abian?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you believe what I say?              <cell>Mitoo ca ba sa acong guipamulong?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<pb n=155 id=pb155><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Read the book                  <cell>Basaha ang libro
<row><cell lang=en>Write the letters              <cell>Sulata ang m&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>Learn the lesson               <cell>Magtoon ca sa lesion
<row><cell lang=en>Learn the lesson by heart      <cell>Saolohon mo ang lesion
<row><cell lang=en>Say the lesson                 <cell>Ihatag mo ang lesion
<row><cell lang=en>Take the lesson                <cell>Pan&gtilde;utana ang lesion
<row><cell lang=en>Count the boys                 <cell>Ihapa ang m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>Take your book                 <cell>Dad-a ang libro mo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do not do that                 <cell>Ayao pagbuhata cana
<row><cell lang=en>Do not eat that meal           <cell>Ayao ca pagcaon nianang calanon
<row><cell lang=en>Do not drink that water        <cell>Ayao ca paginom nianang tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Do not taste this wine         <cell>Ayao pagtilaoi quining vino
<row><cell lang=en>Do not open the door           <cell>Ayao ca pagocab sa pulta
<row><cell lang=en>Do not shut the window         <cell>Ayao ca pagtacop sa ventana
<row><cell lang=en>Do not speak that              <cell>Ayao ca pagsulti niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do not say it                  <cell>Ayao ca pagin&gtilde;on niana
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Feed the pigs                  <cell>Laluga ang m&gtilde;a babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Whip the dog                   <cell>Bunala ang iro
<row><cell lang=en>Drive the cat away             <cell>Bugaua ang iring
<row><cell lang=en>Milk the she-goat              <cell>Pagatasi ang canding
<row><cell lang=en>Saddle the horse               <cell>Sillahi ang cabayo
<pb n=156 id=pb156><row><cell lang=en>Kill the chicken                <cell>Ihaoa ang piso
<row><cell lang=en>Tie the bull                    <cell>Hocta ang toro
<row><cell lang=en>Water the sheep                 <cell>Pasuyupa ang m&gtilde;a carnero
<row><cell lang=en>Water the flowers               <cell>Boboa ang m&gtilde;a bulac
<row><cell lang=en>Pull off the herb               <cell>Ibta ang balili
<row><cell lang=en>Plant the tobacco               <cell>Itanom mo ang tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>Sow the maize                   <cell>Ipugas mo ang maiz
<row><cell lang=en>Cut the tree                    <cell>Putla ang cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Weed the bramble                <cell>Bonglaya ang sagbot
<row><cell lang=en>Plough the sowing               <cell>Darohi ang baul
<row><cell lang=en>Reap the rice                   <cell>Galaba ang humay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know that man?               <cell>Naila ba nimo cadtong tao?
<row><cell lang=en>I do. I do not                      <cell>Naila co. Dili co maila
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know this news?              <cell>Nahibalo ca ba niining noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>I do. I do not                      <cell>Oo. Dili, uala
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know how to sing?            <cell>Maalam ca mucanta?
<row><cell lang=en>I do. I do not                      <cell>Maalam aco. Dili aco maalam
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know where is he?            <cell>Nahibalo ca ba cun hain ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>I do. I do not                      <cell>Oo. Ambut, inay
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I may read                          <cell>Mahimo cong pagbasa
<pb n=157 id=pb157><row><cell lang=en>May I speak?                        <cell>Arang ba naco pagsulti?
<row><cell lang=en>May I run?                          <cell>Mahimo cong pagdalagan?
<row><cell lang=en>You may. You may not                <cell>Mahimo man. Dili mahimo mo
<row><cell lang=en>Can I play?                         <cell>Macadula dula ba aco?
<row><cell lang=en>You cannot, because it makes you ill        <cell>Dili ca macahimo cay cana macadaot canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Can you do that?                    <cell>Macahimo ca ba niana?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot because I am not well      <cell>Dili aco macahimo cay masaquit aco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Must I love God?                    <cell>Higugmaon co ba ang Dios?
<row><cell lang=en>You must                            <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Must I hate my neighbor?            <cell>Dumtan co ba ang acong isigcatao?
<row><cell lang=en>You must not                        <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Must I go to school?                <cell>Catungdanan ba naco ang pagescuela?
<row><cell lang=en>You must                            <cell>Catungdanan mo
<row><cell lang=en>Must I honor my parents?            <cell>Catungdanan co ba ang pagtahod sa acong m&gtilde;a guinicanan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, you must                       <cell>Oo, catungdanan mo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>As white as cotton-fruit            <cell>Maputi in&gtilde;on sa gapas
<row><cell lang=en>As hard as a stone                  <cell>Magahi in&gtilde;on sa bató
<row><cell lang=en>As tall as a cocoa-tree             <cell>Hata-as in&gtilde;on sa usa ca lubi
<pb n=158 id=pb158><row><cell lang=en>As high as a steeple           <cell>Hata-as in&gtilde;on sa torre
<row><cell lang=en>As grave as a judge            <cell>Maligdong in&gtilde;on sa usa ca hocom
<row><cell lang=en>As sweet as sugar              <cell>Matamis in&gtilde;on sa calamay
<row><cell lang=en>As bitter as bile              <cell>Mapaet in&gtilde;on sa apdo
<row><cell lang=en>As dirty as a pig              <cell>Mahugao in&gtilde;on sa babuy
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>As meek as a lamb              <cell>Maaghop in&gtilde;on sa usa ca nati sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>As slow as a snail             <cell>Mahinayon in&gtilde;on sa omang <!-- i.e. hermit crab! -->
<row><cell lang=en>As black as a crow             <cell>Maitum in&gtilde;on sa oac
<row><cell lang=en>As innocent as a dove          <cell>Maputung in&gtilde;on sa salampati
<row><cell lang=en>As silly as a goose            <cell>Tontos in&gtilde;on sa gaquet
<row><cell lang=en>As ugly as a toad              <cell>Malagsot in&gtilde;on sa baqui
<row><cell lang=en>As false as a snake            <cell>Maluibon in&gtilde;on sa halas
<row><cell lang=en>As busy as a bee               <cell>Macuguihon in&gtilde;on sa putiocan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>As gay as a butterfly          <cell>Malipayon in&gtilde;on sa alibangbang
<row><cell lang=en>As strong as a lion            <cell>Maisug in&gtilde;on sa león
<row><cell lang=en>As fierce as a tiger           <cell>Mapintas in&gtilde;on sa tigre
<row><cell lang=en>As cruel as an alligator       <cell>Maban&gtilde;is in&gtilde;on sa buaya
<row><cell lang=en>As hungry as a wolf            <cell>Gogotmon in&gtilde;on sa lobo
<row><cell lang=en>As timid as a hare             <cell>Talauan in&gtilde;on sa liebre
<row><cell lang=en>As faithful as a dog           <cell>Saliganan in&gtilde;on sa iro
<pb n=159 id=pb159><row><cell lang=en>As playful as a kitten        <cell>Tigdula dula in&gtilde;on sa itoy sa iring
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If I were you                 <cell>Ug aco pa icao
<row><cell lang=en>If I were a woman             <cell>Ug babaye pa aco
<row><cell lang=en>If I were his mother          <cell>Cun inahan pa aco nia
<row><cell lang=en>If you were a man             <cell>Ug lalaque pa icao
<row><cell lang=en>Would it be I                 <cell>Ug aco pa
<row><cell lang=en>Would it not be you           <cell>Ug dili pa icao
<row><cell lang=en>Should I get that money       <cell>Cun muangcon pa aco nianang salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Should I go to Manila         <cell>Cun muadto aco unta sa Manila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It is far                     <cell>Halayo man
<row><cell lang=en>It is near                    <cell>Hado-ol man
<row><cell lang=en>It is long                    <cell>Dugay man. Halayo pa
<row><cell lang=en>It is warm                    <cell>Mainit man
<row><cell lang=en>It is cold                    <cell>Matugnao man
<row><cell lang=en>It is dark                    <cell>Man&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it man
<row><cell lang=en>It is late<note n=1 lang=ceb>Quining m&gtilde;a pagpamulong n&gtilde;a iningles: <hi>It is late</hi>, <hi>It is early</hi>, hubadon sa binisaya, ang nahauna, sa m&gtilde;a pulong: <hi>buntag na</hi>, <hi>hapon na</hi>, <hi>gabii na</hi>, <hi>hata-as na ang adlao</hi> &amp;., ug ang icaduha, <hi>buntag pa</hi>, <hi>hapon pa</hi>, <hi>masayo man</hi>, &amp;. sumala sa horas n&gtilde;a guipatun&gtilde;ud sa nagasulti, in&gtilde;on sa batasan pagsabut sa cahologan nianang m&gtilde;a pagpamulong ug sa uban pa, n&gtilde;a, main&gtilde;on sa naasuy, nagpahibalo canatu sa tiempo cun sa horas sa pagtuman sa bisan onsa.</note>                 <cell>Buntag na, hata-as na ang adlao, &amp;.
<pb n=160 id=pb160><row><cell lang=en>It is early                     <cell>Masayo man, buntag pa, &amp;.
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It is raining                   <cell>Nagaolan
<row><cell lang=en>It is windy                     <cell>Nahan&gtilde;in
<row><cell lang=en>It is stormy                    <cell>Nagaonos
<row><cell lang=en>It is lightening                <cell>Nan&gtilde;ilat
<row><cell lang=en>It is thundering                <cell>Nagadalogdog
<row><cell lang=en>It is cloudy                    <cell>Nadagoman
<row><cell lang=en>It is muddy                     <cell>Nalapocan. Dunay daghang lapoc
<row><cell lang=en>It is dusty                     <cell>Naabogan. Dunay daghang abóg
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am reading                    <cell>Nagabasa aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am writing                    <cell>Nagasulat aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am speaking                   <cell>Nagasulti aco
<row><cell lang=en>He is eating                    <cell>Nan&gtilde;aon sia
<row><cell lang=en>She is dining                   <cell>Naniodto sia
<row><cell lang=en>We are breakfasting             <cell>Namahao came. Nagapainit came
<row><cell lang=en>You are supping                 <cell>Nanihapon camo
<row><cell lang=en>They are lunching               <cell>Namahao sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am at home                    <cell>Ania man aco sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>You are at the store            <cell>Diha man icao sa almacen
<row><cell lang=en>He is in the street             <cell>Didto man sia sa dalan
<row><cell lang=en>She is in the room              <cell>Didto sia sa cuarto
<pb n=161 id=pb161><row><cell lang=en>It is in the town            <cell>Didto man sia sa longsod
<row><cell lang=en>We are at the school         <cell>Dinhi came sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>You are in the market        <cell>Diha man camo sa tianggi
<row><cell lang=en>They are in the walk         <cell>Tua sila sa sodoy sodoyan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are you right in?            <cell>May hinungdan ca ba sa...?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you wrong in?            <cell>Uala bay hintungdan ca sa...?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you thirsty?             <cell>Nauhao ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he hungry?                <cell>Guigutum ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Is she tired?                <cell>Nacapuy ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you sleepy?              <cell>Catologon ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you afraid?              <cell>Nahadluc ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they ashamed?            <cell>Naulao ba sila?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What are you doing?          <cell>Onsay guipanagbuhat niño?
<row><cell lang=en>What are you writing?        <cell>Onsay guisulat mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What is he reading?          <cell>Onsay guibasa nia?
<row><cell lang=en>What is she washing?         <cell>Onsay guipamunac nia?
<row><cell lang=en>What is she sewing?          <cell>Onsay guitahi nia?
<row><cell lang=en>What are they speaking?      <cell>Onsay guipanagsulti nila?
<row><cell lang=en>What are you telling?        <cell>Onsay guisuguilon niño?
<row><cell lang=en>What are they talking?       <cell>Onsay guipanagpamulong nila?
</table>

<pb n=162 id=pb162><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Hurry up                     <cell>Dalia. Dalion mo
<row><cell lang=en>Make haste                   <cell>Magdali ca. Dalia
<row><cell lang=en>Be silent                    <cell>Saba diha. Muhilom ca
<row><cell lang=en>Be quiet                     <cell>Puyo ca. Magpuyo ca
<row><cell lang=en>Take this                    <cell>Dauata quini. Coha-a quini
<row><cell lang=en>Wait a moment                <cell>Hulata madiot. Ayao usa. Hulat usa
<row><cell lang=en>Look out                     <cell>Bantay <corr sic=cay>ca</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Leave to me                  <cell>Pasagdi aco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Light the lamp               <cell>Dagcoti ang quinqué
<row><cell lang=en>Put it out                   <cell>Paln&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>Give me fire                 <cell>Padungca aco
<row><cell lang=en>Lay the cloth                <cell>Ipanagana ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Clean the glasses            <cell>Hugasa ang m&gtilde;a vaso
<row><cell lang=en>Make the bed                 <cell>Andama ang caligad-an
<row><cell lang=en>Dust the table               <cell>Paspasa ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Brush the clothes            <cell>Cepillahi ang m&gtilde;a visti
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Go fast                      <cell>Magingsil ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go slowly                    <cell>Maghinay ca sa pagadto
<row><cell lang=en>Speak slowly                 <cell>Hinaye ang pagpamulong
<row><cell lang=en>Speak louder                 <cell>Samta
<row><cell lang=en>Read faster                  <cell>Dalia pa ang pagbasa
<row><cell lang=en>Write better                 <cell>Ayoha ang pagsulat
<row><cell lang=en>Drink any more               <cell>Imna pa
<row><cell lang=en>Learn it again               <cell>Usba ang pagtoon niana
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=163 id=pb163><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go                     <cell>Tala na quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us depart                 <cell>Muguican na quita
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Les>Let</corr> us come back              <cell>Mupauli na quita. Pauli na quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us run                    <cell>Mudalagan na quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us walk                   <cell>Magsodoy sodoy quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us return                 <cell>Mupauli quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us rise                   <cell>Muban&gtilde;on quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us start                  <cell>Muhalin quita
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me                      <cell>Dad-i aco
<row><cell lang=en>Lend me                       <cell>Hulami aco
<row><cell lang=en>Say me                        <cell>Pahibaloa aco
<row><cell lang=en>Show me                       <cell>Todloi aco
<row><cell lang=en>Teach me                      <cell>Ton-i aco
<row><cell lang=en>Give me                       <cell>Taga-i aco
<row><cell lang=en>Tell me                       <cell>Suguinli aco
<row><cell lang=en>Send me                       <cell>Dad-i aco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see                    <cell>Paquita-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me walk                   <cell>Pasodoy sodoy aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me do                     <cell>Pabuhata aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me sleep                  <cell>Pacatolog aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me eat                    <cell>Pacan-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me sit down               <cell>Palingcola aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me smoke                  <cell>Patabaco aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let me come back              <cell>Papaulia aco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Is it I? It is I              <cell>Aco ba? Aco man
<pb n=164 id=pb164><row><cell lang=en>Is it you? It is not you      <cell>Icao ba? Dili man icao
<row><cell lang=en>Is it he?                     <cell>Sia ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it she?                    <cell>Sia ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it it?                     <cell>Sia ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it we? It is not we        <cell>Quita ba? Dili man quita
<row><cell lang=en>Is it you? It is you          <cell>Camo ba? Camo man
<row><cell lang=en>Is it they?                   <cell>Sila ba?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Let him laugh                 <cell>Pacataua sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him play                  <cell>Padula dula sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him walk                  <cell>Palacao sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him see                   <cell>Patanao sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him eat                   <cell>Pacaon sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him drink                 <cell>Painom sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him speak                 <cell>Pasulti sia
<row><cell lang=en>Let him tell                  <cell>Pasuguilon sia
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It is easy to do that               <cell>Masayon mabuhat cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is difficult to get money        <cell>Maculi madan&gtilde;at ang salapi
<row><cell lang=en>It is necessary to love God         <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a higugmaon ang Dios
<row><cell lang=en>It is <corr sic=posible>possible</corr> to build the house          <cell>Mahimo man ang pagtingdug sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>It is <corr sic=imposible>impossible</corr> to find fish            <cell>Dili mahimo macaplag ug isda
<row><cell lang=en>It is good to blame the faults          <cell>Maayo n&gtilde;a badlon&gtilde;on ang m&gtilde;a sayop
<row><cell lang=en>It is worthy to forgive the sins        <cell>Tacus man n&gtilde;a pasayloon ang m&gtilde;a sala
<pb n=165 id=pb165><row><cell lang=en>It is unworthy to deceive the friends       <cell>Dili muan&gtilde;ay ang paglimbong sa m&gtilde;a higala
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish?           <cell>Onsay tin&gtilde;uhaon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want?           <cell>Onsay quinahanglanon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you like?           <cell>Onsay higugmaon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you need?           <cell>Onsay quinahanglanon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you love?           <cell>Onsay higugmaon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you desire?         <cell>Onsay caibgon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you <corr sic=will>want</corr>?           <cell>Onsay buut mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you ask?            <cell>Onsay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Love not the sin            <cell>Ayao paghigugma-a ang sala
<row><cell lang=en>Hate not the enemies        <cell>Ayao pagdumti ang m&gtilde;a caauay
<row><cell lang=en>Forget not the gifts        <cell>Ayao paghicalimti ang m&gtilde;a hatag
<row><cell lang=en>Shame not your father       <cell>Ayao pagcaulaoi ang imong tatay
<row><cell lang=en>Trouble not your mother     <cell>Ayao pagcasamoc-i ang imong nanay
<row><cell lang=en>Frighten not the children       <cell>Ayao pagcalisan&gtilde;-i ang m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>Praise not the proud            <cell>Ayao pagdayega ang m&gtilde;a palabi labihon
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Wex>Vex</corr> not your friends       <cell>Ayao pagcasuco sa imong m&gtilde;a higala
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=166 id=pb166><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to take a bath?         <cell>Buut ca ba maligo?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to take a walk?         <cell>Buut ca magsodoy sodoy?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to take a cigar?        <cell>Buut ca magtabaco?
<row><cell lang=en>I do. I do not                      <cell>Oo, buut aco. Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Will you take wine?                 <cell>Buut ca muinom ug vino?
<row><cell lang=en>I will. I will not                  <cell>Buut aco. Dili aco buut
<row><cell lang=en>Are you willing to take coffee?     <cell>Buut ca muinom ug café?
<row><cell lang=en>I am. I am not                      <cell>Oo. Dili
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It is my book                       <cell>Aco quining libro
<row><cell lang=en>It is your pen                      <cell>Imo ang pluma
<row><cell lang=en>It is his ink                       <cell>Iya ang tinta
<row><cell lang=en>It is not her ruler                 <cell>Dili iya ang regla
<row><cell lang=en>It is its feather                   <cell>Iya man ang balhibo
<row><cell lang=en>This is our book                    <cell>Atu quining libro
<row><cell lang=en>That is your pencil                 <cell>Iño canang lapis
<row><cell lang=en>It is their inkstand                <cell>Ila man ang tintero
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It is mine                          <cell>Aco man
<row><cell lang=en>This is yours                       <cell>Imo man quini
<row><cell lang=en>That is his                         <cell>Iya man cadto
<row><cell lang=en>That is hers                        <cell>Iya man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is its                           <cell>Iya man
<row><cell lang=en>These are ours                      <cell>Amo man quining m&gtilde;a...
<row><cell lang=en>Those are yours                     <cell>Iño man canang m&gtilde;a...
<row><cell lang=en>Those are theirs                    <cell>Ila man cadtong m&gtilde;a...
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=167 id=pb167><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you like to drink?          <cell>Onsa bay iinom mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to dine?           <cell>Onsay ipaniodto mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to dine fish                 <cell>Maniodto aco unta ug isda
<row><cell lang=en>What do you like to eat?            <cell>Onsay buut mong pagcaon?
<row><cell lang=en>I like fruit                        <cell>Mucaon aco unta ug bon&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to breakfast?      <cell>Onsa bay ipainit mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want to sup?            <cell>Onsay ipanihapon niño?
<row><cell lang=en>I want a chicken                    <cell>Manihapon unta aco ug usa ca piso
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you say?                    <cell>Onsay guipamulong mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I say nothing                       <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>What do you mean?                   <cell>Onsay cahologan sa imong pulong?
<row><cell lang=en>I mean you are no good              <cell>N&gtilde;a dili maayo icao
<row><cell lang=en>What do you speak?                  <cell>Onsay guipanagsulti niño?
<row><cell lang=en>We speak of your illness            <cell>Nanagsulti came sa imong saquit
<row><cell lang=en>What do you think?                  <cell>Onsay guipanaghuna huna niño?
<row><cell lang=en>We think of your trouble            <cell>Ang casamoc mo maoy guipanaghuna huna namu
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=168 id=pb168><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How much wine have you?             <cell>Pilay imong vino?
<row><cell lang=en>How much sugar has he?              <cell>Pila bay iyang azucar?
<row><cell lang=en>How much rice has the merchant?     <cell>Pila ba ang bugas sa magbabaliguia?
<row><cell lang=en>How much money has your father?     <cell>Pila ba ang salapi sa imong atan?
<row><cell lang=en>How much beer have you?             <cell>Pila bay imong cerveza?
<row><cell lang=en>How much is your salary?            <cell>Pila bay imong sohol?
<row><cell lang=en>How much is the cost of this hat?       <cell>Tagpila ba quining calo?
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for a hen?      <cell>Pilay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo tun&gtilde;ud sa usa ca himun&gtilde;a-an?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>When I was at home Elizabeth came to speak with me          <cell>Sa diha pa aco sa balay guianha aco ni Isabel
<row><cell lang=en>When I was in the church the dog ate my meal                <cell>Sa didto aco sa singbahan guican-an aco sa iro sa acong calanon
<row><cell lang=en>When I was going to the sea I met your aunt                 <cell>Sa pagadto co sa dagat guihinagbo co ang ia-an mo
<row><cell lang=en>When I was visiting Mercedes her father was wounded         <cell>Igo aco nagduao can Mercedes guisamad-an ang iyang amahan
<pb n=169 id=pb169><row><cell lang=en>When I was going to depart I received one letter from Cebu      <cell>Nadauat co ug usa ca sulat sa Sugbu dayon sa pagguican co
<row><cell lang=en>When I was learning the lesson you were playing             <cell>Igo aco nacatoon sa lesion nanagdula dula camo
<row><cell lang=en>When I came here I have not seen any one asking for me      <cell>Sa acong pagabut dinhi uala maquita co ug bisan quinsa n&gtilde;a nan&gtilde;utana tun&gtilde;ud canaco
<row><cell lang=en>When I arrived <corr sic=to>in</corr> Manila I <corr sic=sow>saw</corr> your niece          <cell>Naquita co ang imong pagumangcon sa pagabut co sa Manila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I shall call at you before I depart from Cebu           <cell>Sa dili pa aco muguican sa Sugbu muhapit aco usa sa iño
<row><cell lang=en>I passed <corr sic=yerterday>yesterday</corr> before your house         <cell>Cahapon miagui aco sa tun&gtilde;ud sa iño
<row><cell lang=en>I shall write before            <cell>Musulat aco usa
<row><cell lang=en>I shall be at the market before ten o&apos;clock         <cell>Muadto aco sa tianggi sa dili pa a las diez
<row><cell lang=en>After your coming the boys will not obey me         <cell>Dili sumugot ang m&gtilde;a bata cutub sa paganhi mo
<row><cell lang=en>I will mend the benches of the school after your holidays           <cell>Sa human na ang vacaciones mo ayohon co ang m&gtilde;a banco sa escuelahan
<pb n=170 id=pb170><row><cell lang=en>I asked the owner for the price of the horse after you saw him          <cell>Sa ubus mo maquita ang cabayo nan&gtilde;utana aco sa tagya sa tun&gtilde;ud sa bale
<row><cell lang=en>My boy is after yours in the school                     <cell>Ang acong bata nagasunud sa imo sa escuelahan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How many horses have you?               <cell>Pila ba ang imong m&gtilde;a cabayo?
<row><cell lang=en>How many dogs have I?                   <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a iro co?
<row><cell lang=en>How many <corr sic=kine>cows</corr> has he?     <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a vaca nia?
<row><cell lang=en>How many children has she?              <cell>Pilay iyang m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>How many times have you gone to the church?     <cell>Sa nacapila miadto ca sa singbahan?
<row><cell lang=en>How often have you read your lesson?            <cell>Sa nacapila guibasa mo ang lesion?
<row><cell lang=en>How many boys are in the school?          <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a bata n&gtilde;a ana-a diha sa escuelahan?
<row><cell lang=en>How many dollars <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> be paid for this house?        <cell>Pila ca pisus buut ca pabayad tun&gtilde;ud niining balay?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am a bachelor             <cell>Olitao aco
<row><cell lang=en>You are a widower           <cell>Balo man icao
<row><cell lang=en>He is a boy                 <cell>Bata man sia
<row><cell lang=en>She is a maid               <cell>Dalaga man sia
<row><cell lang=en>She is a married woman      <cell>Miño man sia
<pb n=171 id=pb171><row><cell lang=en>We are soldiers             <cell>M&gtilde;a sundalo man quita
<row><cell lang=en>You are beggars             <cell>M&gtilde;a paquilimos camo
<row><cell lang=en>They are merchants          <cell>M&gtilde;a comerciante man sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> accompany me?      <cell>Buut ca ba muuban canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will                 <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to come with me?        <cell>Buut ca ba mucuyog canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I do not            <cell>Dili, dili aco buut
<row><cell lang=en>Can you call at my house?           <cell>Mahimo ca muari sa amo?
<row><cell lang=en>I can                   <cell>Mahimo co
<row><cell lang=en>Can you go to Cebu?     <cell>Macaadto ca ba sa Sugbu?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot                <cell>Dili aco macaadto
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How much money have you?            <cell>Pila bay imong salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>I have a little                     <cell>Diriot da
<row><cell lang=en>How much rice has he?               <cell>Pila ba ang bugas nia?
<row><cell lang=en>He has a great deal of it           <cell>Daghan caayo ang bugas nia
<row><cell lang=en>How many bonnets has she?           <cell>Pila bay iyang m&gtilde;a calo?
<row><cell lang=en>She has many of them                <cell>Daghanan ang m&gtilde;a calo nia
<row><cell lang=en>How many chickens have you?         <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a piso mo?
<pb n=172 id=pb172><row><cell lang=en>I have a few                        <cell>Diriot da
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you anything to eat?           <cell>Duna bay imong macaon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have nothing                      <cell>Uala acoy bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Have you anything to sell?          <cell>Duna bay imong ibaliguia?
<row><cell lang=en>I have something                    <cell>Dunay acong ibaliguia
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any wine to drink?         <cell>May vino ca ba n&gtilde;a iinom?
<row><cell lang=en>I have some                         <cell>May vino aco
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any money to change?       <cell>Duna bay imong salapi n&gtilde;a ilisan?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not any                      <cell>Uala acoy salapi
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning                        <cell>Maayong buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Good evening                        <cell>Maayong hapon. Maayong gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                           <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you                           <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am very much obliged to you       <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am at your service                <cell>Tomanon co ang imong m&gtilde;a sogo
<row><cell lang=en>I thank you for your kindness       <cell>Nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa imong calooy
<row><cell lang=en>I give you many thanks for your advice      <cell>Nagahatag aco canimo sa daghang m&gtilde;a pagdiosmagbayad tun&gtilde;ud sa imong sambag
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=173 id=pb173><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you time to dine?              <cell>Duna bay imong tiempo sa pagpaniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you time to study?             <cell>May tiempo ca ba sa pagestudio?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a mind to learn?           <cell>Mahagugma ca ba macatoon?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a wish to learn by heart?      <cell>Mahagugma ca ba sa pagsaolo?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a desire to buy my horse?      <cell>Mahagugma ca ba mupalit sa acong cabayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you the intention to work your field?      <cell>Duna bay imong tuyo sa pagtrabajo sa yuta mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you the courage to do that?        <cell>May gahum ca ba sa pagbuhat niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you the courage to speak to the teacher?       <cell>Ualay icao ug cataha sa pagsulti sa magtoto-on?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of riding?             <cell>Mahagugma ca man&gtilde;abayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of driving?            <cell>Mahagugma ca ba magcarruage?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he fond of bathing?              <cell>Mahagugma sia maligo?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he fond of swimming?             <cell>Mahagugma ba sia luman&gtilde;oy?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they fond of fishing?           <cell>Mahagugma sila magpanagat?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they fond of playing?           <cell>Mahagugma ba sila magdula-dula?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of beer?               <cell>Mahagugma ca ba ug cerveza?
<pb n=174 id=pb174><row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of palm-wine?         <cell>Mahagugma ca ba ug tuba?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you to write?          <cell>Duna bay imong susulaton?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you to read?           <cell>Duna bay imong basahon?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you to do?             <cell>Duna bay imong bubuhaton?
<row><cell lang=en>Has he to go?               <cell>Duna bay iyang adtoon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to work              <cell>Dunay acong trabajoon
<row><cell lang=en>They have not to sell       <cell>Ualay ibaliguia nila
<row><cell lang=en>I have to keep the money    <cell>Dunay acong bantayan ang salapi
<row><cell lang=en>I have to buy some meat     <cell>May acong paliton ug onod
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do it           <cell>Buhata
<row><cell lang=en>Write it        <cell>Sulata
<row><cell lang=en>Bring it        <cell>Dad-a
<row><cell lang=en>Try it          <cell>Sulaya
<row><cell lang=en>Take it         <cell>Dauata
<row><cell lang=en>Drink it        <cell>Imna
<row><cell lang=en>Eat it          <cell>Can-a
<row><cell lang=en>Taste it        <cell>Tilaoi
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am rich           <cell>Salapian man aco
<row><cell lang=en>You are poor        <cell>Macalolooy man icao
<row><cell lang=en>He is handsome      <cell>Matahum man sia
<pb n=175 id=pb175><row><cell lang=en>She is ugly         <cell>Malagsot man sia
<row><cell lang=en>It is pretty        <cell>Maanindut man sia
<row><cell lang=en>We are wise         <cell>Maquinaad manon man quita
<row><cell lang=en>You are clever      <cell>Masinaboton man camo
<row><cell lang=en>They are diligent   <cell>Macuguihonman sila
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am a Spaniard         <cell>Cachila man aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am from Spain         <cell>Taga España man aco
<row><cell lang=en>You are an American     <cell>Americano man icao
<row><cell lang=en>You are from United-States      <cell>Taga Estados Unidos man icao
<row><cell lang=en>She is an American woman        <cell>Americana man sia
<row><cell lang=en>She is a Spanish lady           <cell>Española man sia
<row><cell lang=en>You are a Bisaya                <cell>Bisaya man icao
<row><cell lang=en>You are from Cebu               <cell>Sugbuanon man icao
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Please look for matches         <cell>Ibolong aco nimo ug sacafuegos
<row><cell lang=en>Please buy handkerchiefs for me     <cell>Ipalit aco nimo ug m&gtilde;a paño
<row><cell lang=en>Please get supper for me            <cell>Ipatigayon aco nimo ug panihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Please find a chicken for me        <cell>Ipan&gtilde;ita aco nimo ug usa ca piso
<row><cell lang=en>If you please, give me some money       <cell>Cun maarang sa imong buut, tagai aco unta ug salapi
<pb n=176 id=pb176><row><cell lang=en>Advise to me, if you please         <cell>Sambag-i aco, ug maarang sa pagbuut mo
<row><cell lang=en>Please sit down                     <cell>Lingcod ca. Mulingcod ca usa
<row><cell lang=en>Please take a cigar                 <cell>Coha-a usa ca tinustus
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do me the favor to write to our friend      <cell>Isulat aco nimo sa atung higala
<row><cell lang=en>Do me the favor to answer to me             <cell>Basl-i aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>Beg the president to bring my letters       <cell>Ipadala mo sa presidente ang acong m&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>Beg the boy to help you                     <cell>Paquitabang ca sa bata
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the poor to come back                  <cell>Papaulia ang m&gtilde;a paquilimos
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the servant to sweep my room           <cell>Pasilhigon mo ang sologo-on sa acong cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Send for milk                               <cell>Ipacuha mo ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Send for the children                       <cell>Ipacoha ang m&gtilde;a bata
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Send me your books                          <cell>Ipadala canaco ang m&gtilde;a libro mo
<row><cell lang=en>Send me your watch                          <cell>Ipahatod mo canaco ang horasan mo
<row><cell lang=en>Order the waiter not to go out              <cell>Dili pacanaogon mo ang bata bata
<pb n=177 id=pb177><row><cell lang=en>Order the children not to make noise        <cell>Dili mo pacasaba ang m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>Order the president to mend the school-houses      <cell>Paayohon mo ang presidente sa m&gtilde;a escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Order the pupil to fulfil his duty                  <cell>Patumanon mo ang tinonan sa iyang catungdanan
<row><cell lang=en>Order the policemen to seize the thieves            <cell>Pagapusa ang m&gtilde;a polis sa m&gtilde;a cauatan
<row><cell lang=en>Order the scholars to learn their lesson by heart       <cell>Pasaolohon mo ang m&gtilde;a escuela sa ilang lesion
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Can you read?           <cell>Maalam ca magbasa?
<row><cell lang=en>Can you write?          <cell>Mantigo ca ba musulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Can you speak English?      <cell>Maalam ca ba ug iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>Can you speak Bisaya?       <cell>Mantigo ca sa binisaya?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you speak Spanish?       <cell>Magasulti ca ba ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you speak in Spanish?    <cell>Magquinachila ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you speak English?       <cell>Magasulti ba icao sa iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you speak in English?        <cell>Magainingles ca ba?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in Spanish      <cell>Quinachila-an aco nimo
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in English      <cell>Maginingles ca canaco
<pb n=178 id=pb178><row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in Bisaya       <cell>Magbinisaya ca canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in Chinese      <cell>Magininsic ca canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Translate this book into Spanish        <cell>Quinachilaon mo quining libro
<row><cell lang=en>Translate this letter into English      <cell>Ininglison mo quining sulat
<row><cell lang=en>Translate this writing into the Bisaya language     <cell>Binisayaon mo quining sinulat
<row><cell lang=en>Translate <corr sic=this>these</corr> papers into the Chinese language      <cell>Hubaron mo quining m&gtilde;a mantala-an sa pinolon&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a insic
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am rich, are you not?     <cell>Salapian man aco, ug icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I have no money, have you?      <cell>Uala acoy salapi, ug icao duna ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I have viand, have you not?     <cell>May acong sud-an, ug icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to the church, are you not?      <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa <corr sic="singbabahan">singbahan</corr>, ug icao dili muadto?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not read this book, do you?        <cell>Dili aco magabasa niining libro, ug icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I love the child, do you not?           <cell>Nahagugma aco sa bata, ug icao nahagugma ba usab?
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want to</corr> receive your friend, will you not?       <cell>Buut aco dumauat sa imong amigos, ug icao?
<pb n=179 id=pb179><row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will not">do not want to</corr> learn English, <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr>?     <cell>Dili aco buut macatoon sa iningles, ug icao buut ba?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Never mind                  <cell>Ualay sapayan
<row><cell lang=en>Do not take care of that    <cell>Ayao ca pagtagad niana
<row><cell lang=en>Excuse me                   <cell>Tabe
<row><cell lang=en>Not yet                     <cell>Dili pa, uala pa
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know               <cell>Ambut, inay
<row><cell lang=en>It is said. They say        <cell>Cono cono
<row><cell lang=en>Yes                         <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>No                          <cell>Dili, uala
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to have your hair cut?          <cell>Paalot ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have your dress washed?            <cell>Pabunac ba icao sa visti?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like to have your hat made?          <cell>Pabuhat ca ba sa calo?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have your trousers sewed?          <cell>Patahi ca ba sa imong calsones?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to have your money?             <cell>Pahatag ba icao sa imong salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to have your wages?             <cell>Pasohol ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to get money?                   <cell>Buut ca ba muangcon ug salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to get <corr>a </corr>meal?     <cell>Buut ca ba mudan&gtilde;at ug calanon?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=180 id=pb180><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you talk?                <cell>N&gtilde;ano guipamulong mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you speak?               <cell>N&gtilde;ano nagasulti ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you laugh?               <cell>Onsay guicatauan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you cry?                 <cell>N&gtilde;ano nagatiabao ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you fear?                <cell>Onsay guicahadlucan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you shame?               <cell>Onsay guicaulauan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you run?                 <cell>N&gtilde;ano midalagan ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you stop?                <cell>N&gtilde;ano mihunung ca?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>You are a fast man              <cell>Buang buang man icao
<row><cell lang=en>He is a greenhorn               <cell>Uala siay calibutan
<row><cell lang=en>Raymund is full of tricks       <cell>Tampalasan man si Ramón
<row><cell lang=en>The child is always in the way      <cell>Ang bata nacasamoc guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Theresa is a humbug                 <cell>Tabian caayo si Teresa
<row><cell lang=en>Joseph is under <corr>the </corr>weather     <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon si José
<row><cell lang=en>Morris is a crack                   <cell>Si Mauricio culang culang ug madiot
<row><cell lang=en>Mr. John is a rascal                <cell>Bañaga man si D. Juan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What <corr sic="will you have me">do you want me to do</corr> to-day?       <cell>Onsay buut mo n&gtilde;a bubuhaton co carong adlaua?
<row><cell lang=en>What <corr sic="will you want me">do you want me to do</corr> this evening?     <cell>Onsay ipabuhat mo canaco carong hapon?
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will you">want you to</corr> learn the lesson       <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a macatoon ca sa lesion
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will have you">want you to</corr> go to <corr>the </corr>market            <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a muadto ca unta sa tianggi
<pb n=181 id=pb181><row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will you">want you to</corr> get the money      <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a idan&gtilde;at mo ang salapi
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you good morning                     <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a hatagan ca unta ug maayong buntag
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you to have a bottle of beer         <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a diha unta canimo ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will you">want you to</corr> fulfil your duty       <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a macatuman ca unta sa imong catungdanan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>If you obey your parents, God will reward you           <cell>Cun mutahod ca unta sa imong m&gtilde;a guinicanan, baslan ca sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>If you do well, the boys will imitate your deeds        <cell>Cun maayo unta ang imong batasan, ang m&gtilde;a buhat mo ipanalamin sa m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>If you are diligent to study your lessons, the teacher shall give you a prize       <cell>Ug dao magmacugui ca sa pagtoon, taga-an ca sa maestro ug usa ca premio
<row><cell lang=en>If your sister is out, come here very soon      <cell>Cun uala na caha sa balay ang imong igso-on, bumalic ca dinhi sa madali
<row><cell lang=en>If you read the <hi lang=ceb>Ang Camatuoran</hi>, you will know <corr sic=many>a lot of</corr> news        <cell>Ug magbasa ca sa <hi>Ang Camatuoran</hi>, macaila ca ug daghan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a noticia
<pb n=182 id=pb182><row><cell lang=en>If the grandfather is angry, try to amuse him          <cell>Cun masuco ogaling ang apohan, sulayon mo ang paglin&gtilde;ao lin&gtilde;ao cania
<row><cell lang=en>If the chickens are dear buy none                   <cell>Ug mahal ogaling ang m&gtilde;a piso ayao pagpalita
<row><cell lang=en>If your sister is well, why does she not walk?      <cell>Cun mapiscay ogaling si inday, mano dili sia magasodoy sodoy?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like to be ordered by any one          <cell>Dili aco pasugo sa bisan quinsa
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will not">do not want to</corr> be despised by that cunning fellow       <cell>Dili aco buut pasipad-an nianang tampalasan
<row><cell lang=en>The mother will not be sucked by her child      <cell>Ang inahan dili pasus-an sa iyang bata
<row><cell lang=en>I will not be defeated by that boasting man     <cell>Dili aco padaog nianang palabilabihon
<row><cell lang=en>I will make you the teacher of the town         <cell>Buhaton co icao ug magtotoon sa longsod
<row><cell lang=en>I will <corr sic=compell>compel</corr> the boys to go to school         <cell>Papugson co ang m&gtilde;a bata sa pagescuela
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you to become a prudent man          <cell>Guitin&gtilde;uha co n&gtilde;a magbuutan ca unta
<row><cell lang=en>I wish Peter to become a catholic       <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a magcatolico unta si Pedro
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<pb n=183 id=pb183><p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am sad because my father is dead              <cell>Nasubu aco cay guicamatyan aco sa acong tatay
<row><cell lang=en>I have not gone because my daughter is sick     <cell>Uala aco muadto cay guicasaquitan aco sa acong anac
<row><cell lang=en>I did not do that because I have been told a lie        <cell>Uala co buhata cana cay guibacac-an aco
<row><cell lang=en>I have no money for my house is burnt           <cell>Uala acoy salapi cay guicasunugan aco sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>I am glad for I have heard many good news       <cell>Nalipay aco cay guisuguinlan aco ug daghang m&gtilde;a noticia n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am angry because my children troubled me      <cell>Nasuco aco cay guicasamocan aco sa acong m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like to dine because I have been robbed        <cell>Dili aco laihan maniodto cay guicauatan aco
<row><cell lang=en>I do not trust you for I was deceived           <cell>Dili aco sumalig canimo cay guilimbon&gtilde;an aco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>He has the headache             <cell>Masaquit sia sa olo
<row><cell lang=en>He has a fever                  <cell>Guihilantan sia
<row><cell lang=en>He has a cold                   <cell>Nasip-on sia
<row><cell lang=en>I have sore fingers             <cell>Masaquit ang acong m&gtilde;a todlo
<pb n=184 id=pb184><row><cell lang=en>I have sore feet                <cell>Masaquit ang acong m&gtilde;a ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>He has sore throat              <cell>Masaquit sia sa totonlan
<row><cell lang=en>I am very sick                  <cell>Masaquit aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am very well                  <cell>Mapiscay aco caayo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you feel?               <cell>Onsay imong guibati?
<row><cell lang=en>What makes you so ill?          <cell>Onsay nacasaquit canimo sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>What is the matter with you?        <cell>Onsa ba ang saquit mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What is your sickness?          <cell>Onsa bay saquit mo?
<row><cell lang=en>How do you feel?                <cell>Comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>How are you?                    <cell>Comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Why are you so weak?            <cell>Onsay nacaluya canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why are you so sick?            <cell>N&gtilde;ano masaquit ca sa in&gtilde;on?
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Be prudent                      <cell>Magbuutan ca
<row><cell lang=en>Be saint                        <cell>Magsantos ca
<row><cell lang=en>Be diligent                     <cell>Magmacugui ca
<row><cell lang=en>Be kind                         <cell>Magmaloloyon ca
<row><cell lang=en>Be not afraid                   <cell>Ayao ca cahadluc
<row><cell lang=en>Be not ashamed                  <cell>Di ca maulao
<row><cell lang=en>Be not in hurry                 <cell>Ayao pagdalia
<row><cell lang=en>Be not molest                   <cell>Ayao pagcasamoca
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Let me alone                    <cell>Pasagdi aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let him do it                   <cell>Pasagdi sia
<pb n=185 id=pb185><row><cell lang=en>Do not take care of that        <cell>Ayao ca pagtagad niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do not meddle in your friend&apos;s business     <cell>Ayao ca paghilabot sa m&gtilde;a buhaton sa higala mo
<row><cell lang=en>Dress yourself                  <cell>Pavisti ca
<row><cell lang=en>Wash yourselves                 <cell>Maghilamos camo
<row><cell lang=en>Change your clothes             <cell>Magilis ca
<row><cell lang=en>Take the dirty linen            <cell>Hipusa ang bulunacan
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>That is <corr sic=may>my</corr> business        <cell>Caogalin&gtilde;on co canang buhat
<row><cell lang=en>That is very dear       <cell>Mahal caayo cana
<row><cell lang=en>That is very cheap      <cell>Barato man caayo cana
<row><cell lang=en>That is of no use       <cell>Ualay pulus cana
<row><cell lang=en>That is worthy of reward        <cell>Tacus n&gtilde;a pagabaslan cana
<row><cell lang=en>That is unworthy of remembrance     <cell>Dili tacus n&gtilde;a hinumduman cana
<row><cell lang=en>That house is to let        <cell>Aban&gtilde;an canang balay
<row><cell lang=en>That horse is to sell       <cell>Ibaliguia canang cabayo
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How high is your house?     <cell>Pila ba ang cata-ason sa balay mo?
<row><cell lang=en>How deep is the well?       <cell>Pila ba ang calaodan sa atabay?
<row><cell lang=en>How tall is your sister?        <cell>Pila ang cata-as sa imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>How large is the room?          <cell>Pila ang cadaco sa cuarto?
<row><cell lang=en>How wide is the parlor?         <cell>Pila ba ang calapdon sa salas?
<pb n=186 id=pb186><row><cell lang=en>It is five yards wide       <cell>Lima ca yarda
<row><cell lang=en>How thick is the wall?      <cell>Pila ang cabaga sa cota?
<row><cell lang=en>It is ten inches thick      <cell>Napolo ca punto (pulgada)
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How far is it from here to Cebu?        <cell>Pila ba ang cahalayo cutub dinhi n&gtilde;adto sa Sugbu?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not very far                      <cell>Dili man halayo caayot
<row><cell lang=en>How many miles is it?                   <cell>Pila ba ca milla?
<row><cell lang=en>Ten miles only                          <cell>Napolo da ca milla
<row><cell lang=en>How old is your brother?                <cell>Pila ba ang edad sa igso-on mo?
<row><cell lang=en>He is twenty years old                  <cell>Caloha-an ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>I am older than he                      <cell>Magulang aco cania
<row><cell lang=en>I am twenty-five years old              <cell>Caloha-an ug lima ca tuig na ang edad co
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do not let him to come in               <cell>Ayao ca pagpasulud cania
<row><cell lang=en>Do not let him to do that               <cell>Dili nimo sia pabuhaton niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do not permit him to spend the money    <cell>Ayao ca pagpausic cania sa salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Do not permit her to go to the ball     <cell>Ayao pagtuguti sia sa pagadto sa sayaoan
<row><cell lang=en>Do not allow him to gamble              <cell>Ayao pagtuguti sia sa pagsugal
<row><cell lang=en>Do not allow him to drink too much wine     <cell>Ayao pagpainom cania ug vino sa hinlabihan
<pb n=187 id=pb187><row><cell lang=en>Do not consent to be deceived by anybody        <cell>Ayao pagpalimbong ca sa bisan quinsa
<row><cell lang=en>Do never consent to his manners         <cell>Ayao ca pagoyon sa guihapon sa m&gtilde;a lihoc nia
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I was told you will depart              <cell>Guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a gumilican ca
<row><cell lang=en>I have heard your father is going to die        <cell>Guinoticiahan aco n&gtilde;a mamalatay ang imong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>They say your son will be married very soon     <cell>Mamiliño, cono, ang imong anac
<row><cell lang=en>It is said that this man is a murderer          <cell>Mamomono man quining tao, cono
<row><cell lang=en>People say that the war is over                 <cell>Natapus na, cono, ang guerra
<row><cell lang=en>Somebody says you are a proud man               <cell>Dunay namulong n&gtilde;a palabilabihon ca
<row><cell lang=en>Somebody says that your daughter went not to school         <cell>Dunay nagsuguilon n&gtilde;a ang anac mo uala muadto sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Some one told to me that the feast of the town will take place on Saturday      <cell>Guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a oña sa Sábado mao ang fiesta sa longsod
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How long have you been here?            <cell>Dugay na ba icao dinhi?
<row><cell lang=en>I have been here three months           <cell>Totolo ca bulan
<pb n=188 id=pb188><row><cell lang=en>How long is it since your father arrived?       <cell>Dugay na ba n&gtilde;a miabut ang tatay mo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not yet long          <cell>Dili pa dugay
<row><cell lang=en>How long is it since you saw him?       <cell>Pila ca adlao na cutub sa pagquita mo cania?
<row><cell lang=en>A week only         <cell>Usa ca semana da
<row><cell lang=en>How long is it since you have lived here?       <cell>Pilay dugay cutub sa pagpuyo mo dinhi?
<row><cell lang=en>Five years ago      <cell>Dugay na lima ca tuig
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock will you dine?          <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas ipaniodto niño?
<row><cell lang=en>At twelve o&apos;clock           <cell>Sa a las doce
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock will you set out?       <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas iguican niño?
<row><cell lang=en>At half past two            <cell>Sa a las dos y media
<row><cell lang=en>What o&apos;clock is it?         <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas?
<row><cell lang=en>It is ten minutes to five       <cell>Culang napolo ca minuto para las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>What time is it?                <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas?
<row><cell lang=en>It is a quarter to eleven       <cell>Tres cuartos para las once
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Is there any one in the church?         <cell>Duna bay tao sa singbahan?
<row><cell lang=en>There is none                           <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>Is there anybody in the house?          <cell>Duna bay tao sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>There is nobody                         <cell>Uala
<pb n=189 id=pb189><row><cell lang=en>Are there many girls in the school?     <cell>Duna bay daghang m&gtilde;a bata n&gtilde;a babaye sa escuelahan?
<row><cell lang=en>There are a few                         <cell>Dunay diriot. Diriot da
<row><cell lang=en>Is there any one speaking English?      <cell>Duna bay macasulti sa iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>There are some of them                  <cell>Dunay pila ca booc
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Studying the languages is useful        <cell>Mapulus man ang pagestudio sa m&gtilde;a pinamulon&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Playing at cards is no good             <cell>Dili maayo ang pagbaraja
<row><cell lang=en>To love the parents will be always praised          <cell>Dalayegon guihapon ang paghigugma sa m&gtilde;a guinicanan
<row><cell lang=en>To despise the poor is an unworthy action           <cell>Maoy usa ca buhat n&gtilde;a dili tacus ang pagpasipala sa m&gtilde;a mahan&gtilde;ul
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish anything else?              <cell>Nagatin&gtilde;uha ca pa ug lain?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not wish anything else             <cell>Dili na aco magatin&gtilde;uha ug lain
<row><cell lang=en>Do you take notice of him?              <cell>Magtagad ba icao cania?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not take notice of him             <cell>Dili aco magtagad cania
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The cat mews                            <cell>Ang iring nagan&gtilde;iao
<row><cell lang=en>The cow moos                            <cell>Ang vaca nagain&gtilde;a
<pb n=190 id=pb190><row><cell lang=en>The horse neighs                        <cell>Ang cabayo nagabuhihi
<row><cell lang=en>The sheep bleats                        <cell>Ang carnero nagabahaha
<row><cell lang=en>The mouse squeaks                       <cell>Ang balagtoc nagaic-ic
<row><cell lang=en>The hen cackles                         <cell>Ang himun&gtilde;a-an nagapotac
<row><cell lang=en>The cock crows                          <cell>Ang sonoy nagatalaoc
<row><cell lang=en>The dove coos                           <cell>Ang salampati nagaagomod
<row><cell lang=en>The dog barks                           <cell>Ang iro nagausig
<row><cell lang=en>The frog croaks                         <cell>Ang tala tala nagacala cala
<row><cell lang=en>The pig grunts                          <cell>Ang babuy nagaioic
<row><cell lang=en>The canary warbles                      <cell>Ang canario nagalirog lirog
<row><cell lang=en>The bee buzzes                          <cell>Ang putiocan nagahagonghong
<row><cell lang=en>The raven croaks                        <cell>Ang oac nagaoac
<row><cell lang=en>The kite caws                           <cell>Ang banug nagaticuy
<row><cell lang=en>The chickens pip                        <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a piso nagayapyap
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The horse trots                         <cell>Ang cabayo nagatrote
<row><cell lang=en>The fish swims                          <cell>Ang isda nagalan&gtilde;oy
<row><cell lang=en>The turtle dives and swims              <cell>Ang pauican nagasalom ug nagacapay capay
<row><cell lang=en>The monkey climbs                       <cell>Ang amo nagadalicatcat
<row><cell lang=en>The tortoise creeps                     <cell>Ang ba-o nagacamang
<row><cell lang=en>The bird flies                          <cell>Ang langgam nagalupad
<pb n=191 id=pb191><row><cell lang=en>The rabbit flees                        <cell>Ang conejo midalagan
<row><cell lang=en>The worm crawls                         <cell>Ang olod nagacuyamang
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The horse kicks                         <cell>Ang cabayo nagatindac
<row><cell lang=en>The cow gores                           <cell>Ang vaca nagasun&gtilde;ay
<row><cell lang=en>The dog bites                           <cell>Ang iro mama-ac
<row><cell lang=en>The cat scratches                       <cell>Ang iring nagacamas
<row><cell lang=en>The wasp stings                         <cell>Ang tamboboan nagaicot
<row><cell lang=en>The snake bites                         <cell>Ang halas mama-ac
<row><cell lang=en>The crab pinches                        <cell>Ang casag nagapan&gtilde;ig
<row><cell lang=en>The hen pricks                          <cell>Ang manuc nagatoco
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>The baby smiles                         <cell>Ang bata nagan&gtilde;isi n&gtilde;isi
<row><cell lang=en>The child weeps                         <cell>Ang bata nagahilac
<row><cell lang=en>The boy laughs                          <cell>Ang batang lalaqui micataua
<row><cell lang=en>The girl sobs                           <cell>Ang batang babaye nagabacho
<row><cell lang=en>The man moans                           <cell>Ang lalaqui nagaagolo
<row><cell lang=en>The woman complains                     <cell>Ang babaye nagaagodoy
<row><cell lang=en>The maid sighs                          <cell>Ang dalaga nagahupao
<row><cell lang=en>The bachelor yawns                      <cell>Ang olitao nagahoyab
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Our task is closed                      <cell>Tapus na ang atung buhat
<row><cell lang=en>This is finished                        <cell>Human na quini
<row><cell lang=en>It is over                              <cell>Tapus na, human na
<row><cell lang=en>The war is over                         <cell>Tapus na ang pagpangubat
<pb n=192 id=pb192><row><cell lang=en>The wine is out                         <cell>Nahudut na ang vino
<row><cell lang=en>My beer is out                          <cell>Guihotdan aco sa cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>We are at the end                       <cell>Ania quita sa catapusan
<row><cell lang=en>End                                     <cell>Catapusan
</table>



<div1 id=s62>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagtocso sa pagsusi cun sa pagpan&gtilde;utana sa bisan onsa.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you call this?              <cell>Onsay n&gtilde;alan niini?
<row><cell lang=en>What is that?                       <cell>Onsa ba cana? Onsa ba cadto?
<row><cell lang=en>What is it? What is the matter?     <cell>Onsa ba? Onsalan?
<row><cell lang=en>What does it mean?                  <cell>Onsay cahologan niana?
<row><cell lang=en>What is this?                       <cell>Onsa ba quini?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you ask for?                <cell>Onsay guipan&gtilde;utana mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What did they answer?               <cell>Onsay guitubag nila?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you say to it?              <cell>Onsay ipamulong mo sa tun&gtilde;ud niana?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you think of it?            <cell>Onsay guihuna huna mo niana?
<row><cell lang=en>What are you doing?                 <cell>Onsay guibuhat mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What does he say?                   <cell>Onsay <corr sic=polung>pulong</corr> nia?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want?                   <cell>Onsay buut mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want to say?            <cell>Onsay buut mong pagpamulong?
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to have?           <cell>Onsay buut mong pagangcon?
<row><cell lang=en>What <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> get?                  <cell>Onsay buut mong pagdan&gtilde;at?
<pb n=193 id=pb193><row><cell lang=en>What is rice good for?              <cell>Onsa ba ang pagcaayo sa bugas?
<row><cell lang=en>What kind of bird is that?          <cell>Onsa ba canang langgama?
<row><cell lang=en>What are you saying to one another?     <cell>Onsay guipaquigpulong pulong niño?
<row><cell lang=en>What is it that you have come?          <cell>Onsay imong guianhi? Onsay tuyo mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What is your trouble?               <cell>Onsa ba ang imong casamoc?
<row><cell lang=en>Which way shall we go?              <cell>Onsang dalana atung pagalactan?
<row><cell lang=en>Which paper do you need?            <cell>Onsang papela ang iquinahanglan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Which dress is the best?            <cell>Onsang vistiha ang labing maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Which is the worst?                 <cell>Onsa ba ang labing dautan?
<row><cell lang=en>Whose book is this?                 <cell>Cansa ba quining libro?
<row><cell lang=en>Whose stick is that?                <cell>Quinsa ba ang tagya nianang bastón?
<row><cell lang=en>Whose fault is it?                  <cell>Cansa ang sala? Quinsa ang tagsala?
<row><cell lang=en>Whose boots are those?              <cell>Cansa ba cadtong botas?
<row><cell lang=en>Whose children are these?           <cell>Cansa ba quining m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Who told you that?                  <cell>Quinsa ba ang nagsuguilon canimo niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Who told you so?                    <cell>Quinsay nagsuguilon canimo sa in&gtilde;on?
<pb n=194 id=pb194><row><cell lang=en>Who makes this coat?                <cell>Quinsa ba ang nagabuhat niining americana?
<row><cell lang=en>Who speaks so loud?                 <cell>Quinsa ba ang nagacasaba diha?
<row><cell lang=en>Who runs?                           <cell>Quinsay midalagan?
<row><cell lang=en>Who wrote this letter?              <cell>Quinsay nagsulat niining sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Who is reading?                     <cell>Quinsa ba ang nagabasa?
<row><cell lang=en>Who did so?                         <cell>Quinsa ang nagbuhat sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>Who came first?                     <cell>Quinsa ba ang nahaunang mianhi?
<row><cell lang=en>Who did that?                       <cell>Quinsa ba ang nagbuhat niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom do you speak of?               <cell>Quinsay guihisgutan niño?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom do you speak to?               <cell>Quinsay guipamulon&gtilde;an mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom do yo ask for?                 <cell>Quinsay guipan&gtilde;utanan niño?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom are you looking for?           <cell>Quinsay guipan&gtilde;ita mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom is it for?                     <cell>Cansa ba cana? Iasa mo cana?
<row><cell lang=en>What is that for?                   <cell>Onsay tuyo niana? Iasa cana?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom did you hate?                  <cell>Quinsay guidumtan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Whom are you talking to?            <cell>Quinsay iñong guisultihan?
<row><cell lang=en>When did you hear that?             <cell>Canosa madun&gtilde;og mo cana?
<pb n=195 id=pb195><row><cell lang=en>When will you come?                 <cell>Anosa ca muanhi
<row><cell lang=en>When will you leave for Manila?     <cell>Anosa muadto ca sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>When will you return?               <cell>Anosa ca mupauli?
<row><cell lang=en>When did you arrive?                <cell>Canosa paghiabut mo?
<row><cell lang=en>When did you depart?                <cell>Canosa minguican ca?
<row><cell lang=en>When did you do it?                 <cell>Canosa buhata cana?
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going to?             <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you wish to go?            <cell>Asa buut mong pagadto?
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you come from?             <cell>Sa onsa ca? Diin ca guican?
<row><cell lang=en>Where is he?                        <cell>Hain ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the coach?                 <cell>Hain ba ang carruage?
<row><cell lang=en>Where is John?                      <cell>Hain ba si Juan?
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you taking it?            <cell>Iasa cana?
<row><cell lang=en>Where is your house?                <cell>Saa ang balay mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you live?                  <cell>Diin nagapuyo ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Where is my hat?                    <cell>Hain ba ang acong calo?
<row><cell lang=en>Who has your book?                  <cell>Hain ba ang imong libro?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not answer?              <cell>Mano di ca mutubag?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not speak?               <cell>Mano di ca magsulti?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you say that?                <cell>N&gtilde;ano namulong ca niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Why did you stay at home?           <cell>N&gtilde;ano didto ca sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you speak?                   <cell>N&gtilde;ano nagasulti ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Why will you not come back?         <cell>Mano di ca bumalic?
<row><cell lang=en>Why will you go to bed?             <cell>Mano muhigda ca?
<pb n=196 id=pb196><row><cell lang=en>Why did he run?                     <cell>N&gtilde;ano mindalagan sia?
<row><cell lang=en>How far do you go?                  <cell>Asa cutub muadto ca?
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do that?                 <cell>Guionsa ang pagbuhat mo niana?
<row><cell lang=en>How do you speak this?              <cell>Onsaon mong pagpamulong niini?
<row><cell lang=en>How did you travel?                 <cell>Guionsa ang pagviaje mo?
<row><cell lang=en>How does he go?                     <cell>Onsaon niang pagadto?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have it?                   <cell>Buut ca ba niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you get that?                  <cell>Buut ca ba muangcon niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Will they come with me?             <cell>Buut ba sila mucuyog canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>Will he be at home to-night?       <cell>Mupauli ba sia sa balay caron gabi-i?
<row><cell lang=en>Will she do that?                   <cell>Buut ba sia magbuhat niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you understand me?               <cell>Nacasabut ca ba canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you hear me?                     <cell>Nacadun&gtilde;ug ca ba canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>Does Mary hear the teacher?         <cell>Nacadun&gtilde;ug ba si Maria sa magtotoon?
<row><cell lang=en>Does Peter read the lesson?         <cell>Guibasa ba ni Pedro ang lesion?
<row><cell lang=en>Does the steamer start this evening?        <cell>Muguican ba ang vapor caron hapon?
<row><cell lang=en>Do they write the letters?          <cell>Nagasulat ba sila sa m&gtilde;a sulat<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Do you go to the church?            <cell>Muadto ba camo sa singbahan?
<pb n=197 id=pb197><row><cell lang=en>Is he at home?                      <cell>Diha ba sia sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>Is he out?                          <cell>Uala ba sia? Nanaog ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they playing?                   <cell>Nanagdula dula ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they running?                   <cell>Nanagdalagan ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you anything?                  <cell>Duna ba canimo ug bisan onsa?
<row><cell lang=en>Have you my books?                  <cell>Diha ba canimo ang acong m&gtilde;a libro?
<row><cell lang=en>Is there any one?                   <cell>Duna bay tao diha?
<row><cell lang=en>Are there any boys?                 <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a bata diha?
<row><cell lang=en>Are there any flowers in the garden?        <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a bulac sa tanaman?
<row><cell lang=en>Is there any paper in the desk?             <cell>Duna bay papel sa sulatan?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I exchange my money?                  <cell>Ilisan co ba ang acong salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I call the servant?                   <cell>Taogon co ba ang sologo-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it necessary for you to answer the letter?       <cell>Quinahanglan ba n&gtilde;a bumalos ca sa sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it good living in Manila?                <cell>Maayo ba ang pagpuyo sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it easy to finish this work?             <cell>Masayon ba ang pagcatapus niining buhat?
</table>



<pb n=198 id=pb198>
<div1 id=s63>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a pinamulon&gtilde;an.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Do you speak English?           <cell>Nagasulti ca ba ug iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do                       <cell>Oo, nagasulti aco
<row><cell lang=en>I speak it a little             <cell>Nagasulti aco ug diotay
<row><cell lang=en>I do not speak it well          <cell>Dili maayo ang pagsulti co sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>I begin to speak it             <cell>Misugod aco sa pagsulti sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>I speak it enough to make myself understood     <cell>Ngasulti aco sa iningles n&gtilde;a igo sa pagpaquigsabut sa acong pulong
<row><cell lang=en>I understand it a little        <cell>Nacasabut aco ug diotay
<row><cell lang=en>I understand it perfectly       <cell>Nacasabut aco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I pronounce very badly          <cell>Dautan caayo ang pagcasangpot co
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know Bisaya?             <cell>Maalam ca sa binisaya?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I do not                    <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>I find it very difficult        <cell>Maculi man canaco ang pagsulti co niana
<row><cell lang=en>It is very easy                 <cell>Masayon man
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I think so, but for the natives        <cell>Oo, masayon man lagui, apan sa m&gtilde;a bisaya hinoo
<row><cell lang=en>You cannot speak Bisaya because you have not practised it       <cell>Dili ca macasulti ug binisaya cay uala ca magsulti niana sa canunay
<pb n=199 id=pb199><row><cell lang=en>I wish to practise conversation a good deal         <cell>Buut aco unta magapulong pulong niana sa masubsub
<row><cell lang=en>Does he speak Spanish?              <cell>Nagasulti ba sia ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>He does                             <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>He speaks it very well              <cell>Nagasangpot sia ug maayo sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>He speaks it badly                  <cell>Dili maayo ang pagsulti nia niana
<row><cell lang=en>He speaks it tolerably well         <cell>Maarang arang ang pagsulti nia sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>Can you speak Latin?                <cell>Mantigo ca ug linatin?
<row><cell lang=en>I can                               <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot speak it, but I can <corr sic=traslate>translate</corr> it into Spanish        <cell>Dili aco macahimo magsulti sa linatin, apan mahimo cong paghubad niana sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>How long have you been studying Spanish?            <cell>Dugay na n&gtilde;a nacatoon ca ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>I have been learning it three months                <cell>Tolo ca bulan da cutub sa pagsugod co sa pagtoon niana
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not use to speak Bisaya?                 <cell>Mano di ca magasulti ug binisaya sa canunay?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I am afraid of making blunders              <cell>Cay nahadluc aco sa pagpamulong ug m&gtilde;a sayop
<row><cell lang=en>With what grammar did you learn Bisaya?             <cell>Sa onsang gramática nacatoon ca ug binisaya?
<pb n=200 id=pb200><row><cell lang=en>With the grammar of Father Zueco                    <cell>Sa gramática ni P. Zueco
<row><cell lang=en>I learned Bisaya with the grammar written by Father Encina      <cell>Aco nacatoon ug binisaya sa gramática n&gtilde;a guisulat ni P. Encina
<row><cell lang=en>What professor have you?            <cell>Quinsa ba ang imong magtotoon?
<row><cell lang=en>An Augustinian Father               <cell>Usa ca Pareng Agustinos
<row><cell lang=en>Teach me English                    <cell>Ton-i aco ug iningles
<row><cell lang=en>Teach me Spanish and I will teach you Bisaya            <cell>Todlo-i aco ug quinachila ug aco magatodlo canimo ug binisaya
<row><cell lang=en>If you please, I shall teach you English            <cell>Cun mahagugma ca unta, todloan co icao ug iningles
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer to learn Spanish           <cell>Guipalabi co ang pagtoon sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>It is very difficult to understand Spanish          <cell>Maculi man caayo ang pagcasabut sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>I think so              <cell>Mao man
<row><cell lang=en>Is it easy to learn a language?         <cell>Masayon ba ang pagtoon sa usa ca pinulon&gtilde;an?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not, because it is necessary to study a great deal            <cell>Dili, tun&gtilde;ud cay quinahanglan gayud ang pagestudio sa dacong cacugui
<row><cell lang=en>Do you understand what I say?           <cell>Nacasabut ca ba sa acong guiin&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>I understand it very little             <cell>Diriot da caayo ang m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a nasabut co
<pb n=201 id=pb201><row><cell lang=en>Have you understood me?         <cell>Nasabut mo ang acong pulong?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                     <cell>Oo, nasabut co
<row><cell lang=en>I can not understand you if you do not speak slowly         <cell>Dili aco macasabut canimo cun dili ca unta magmahinay sa pagsulti
<row><cell lang=en>Will you speak English?             <cell>Buut ca ba magsulti sa iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you <corr sic=wisth>wish</corr> to speak Spanish?            <cell>Buut ca ba magsulti ug quinachila?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I wish                 <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let us speak a little       <cell>Managsulti quita macadiot
<row><cell lang=en>Let us speak Spanish        <cell>Magquinachila quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us speak English        <cell>Maginingles quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us speak Latin          <cell>Maglinatin quita
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in English      <cell>Ininglisan aco
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in Bisaya       <cell>Binisaya-an aco
<row><cell lang=en>Speak to me in Chinese      <cell>Ininsican aco
<row><cell lang=en>Translate this book into English            <cell>Ininglison mo quining libro
<row><cell lang=en>Translate this news into Spanish            <cell>Quinachilaon mo quining noticia
<row><cell lang=en>Does your boy understand Bisaya?            <cell>Nacasabut ba ang imong bata sa binisaya?
<row><cell lang=en>He understood it formerly                   <cell>Nacasabut sia niana sa caniadto
<row><cell lang=en>Are you learning the English language?      <cell>Nacatoon ca ba sa pinolon&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a inglés?
<pb n=202 id=pb202><row><cell lang=en>I am not, because I was told that the pronunciation of that language is very difficult      <cell>Uala, cay guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a maculi man caayo ang pagsangpot nianang pinamolon&gtilde;an
</table>


<div1 id=s64>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a fecha, m&gtilde;a adlao, &amp;.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Come to-day                     <cell>Muanhi ca caron adlaoa
<row><cell lang=en>Come to-morrow morning          <cell>Muari ca ugma sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Early                           <cell>Masayo, sa pagcabuntag
<row><cell lang=en>As early as I                   <cell>Masayo in&gtilde;on canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Earlier than I                  <cell>Masayo pa canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Not so early as I               <cell>Dili masayo in&gtilde;on canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Does he go to church earlier than you?      <cell>Muadto ba sia sa singbahan labi pang masayo canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>I go too early                  <cell>Miadto aco sa buntag pa caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I go at five o&apos;clock in the morning         <cell>Muadto aco sa a las cinco sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>It is too early. It is very early           <cell>Labihan casayo
<row><cell lang=en>I would go at eight o&apos;clock                 <cell>Nabatasan co ang pagadto sa a las ocho
<row><cell lang=en>It is late                                  <cell>Buntag na man
<row><cell lang=en>No, it is early                             <cell>Dili, buntag pa man
<row><cell lang=en>Go there on Christmas                       <cell>Mamasco ca didto sa Pagcatao
<pb n=203 id=pb203><row><cell lang=en>Perhaps I shall not be able because it is long      <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali dili aco macahimo cay halayo pa
<row><cell lang=en>I shall see him at Easter                           <cell>Maquita co sia sa pasco sa Pagcabanhao
<row><cell lang=en>I shall go to you at Michaelmas                     <cell>Muari aco sa iño sa fiesta ni S. Miguel
<row><cell lang=en>At the end of the week                              <cell>Sa catapusan sa semana
<row><cell lang=en>Towards the middle of the month                     <cell>Hapit sa tun&gtilde;a sa bulan
<row><cell lang=en>About the end of the year                           <cell>Sa tumalapus ang tuig
<row><cell lang=en>The fourth of the present month                     <cell>Sa icaupat niining bulana
<row><cell lang=en>The first of the next month                         <cell>Sa nahauna sa bulan n&gtilde;a muabut
<row><cell lang=en>The next quarter                                    <cell>Sa trimestre n&gtilde;a umalabut
<row><cell lang=en>Next year                                           <cell>Sa tuig n&gtilde;a banos niini
<row><cell lang=en>When did you leave the town?                        <cell>Canosa minhalin ca sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>Two months ago                                      <cell>Duha na ca bulan
<row><cell lang=en>It is three weeks since                             <cell>Tolo na ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>A fortnight ago                                     <cell>Duha na ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>Four years ago                                      <cell>Upat na ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>Eight days since                                    <cell>Ualo na ca adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know what o&apos;clock is it?                     <cell>Nahibalo ca cun onsa n&gtilde;a horas caron?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know what time is it?                        <cell><corr sic=Nahabalo>Nahibalo</corr> ca cun onsa n&gtilde;a horas?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                                       <cell>Ambut
<row><cell lang=en>What o&apos;clock is it?                                 <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas?
<pb n=204 id=pb204><row><cell lang=en>I cannot tell you exactly                           <cell>Ambut cun onsa n&gtilde;a horas n&gtilde;a matuod
<row><cell lang=en>Will you be so kind as to tell me the hour?         <cell>Mahagugma ca ba magpahibalo canaco cun onsay horas caron?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, sir, it is half past six                       <cell>Oo, señor, media na para las seis
<row><cell lang=en>What o&apos;clock is it by your watch?                   <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas sa horasan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is about two o&apos;clock                             <cell>Hapit na sa a las dos
<row><cell lang=en>It is about twelve o&apos;clock                          <cell>Sa a las doce capin cun culang
<row><cell lang=en>It is one o&apos;clock                                   <cell>A la una na
<row><cell lang=en>It is ten minutes past five                         <cell>Las cinco y diez minutos
<row><cell lang=en>It is on the stroke of three                        <cell>Hapit na mabagting las tres
<row><cell lang=en>It is just struck twelve                            <cell>Human na bagtin&gtilde;a las doce
<row><cell lang=en>It is noon                                          <cell>Odto na
<row><cell lang=en>It is early                                         <cell>Sayo pa
<row><cell lang=en>It is late                                          <cell>Hata-as na ang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Is it late?                                         <cell>Hata-as na ang adlao? Modto na?
<row><cell lang=en>It is                                               <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>It is early                                         <cell>Buntag pa man
<row><cell lang=en>What day of the week is it to-day?                  <cell>Onsa ba carong adlaua?
<row><cell lang=en>It is Monday                                        <cell>Lunes man caron
<row><cell lang=en>When will your friend come?                         <cell>Anosa muabut ang higala mo?
<pb n=205 id=pb205><row><cell lang=en>I think he shall be here on Friday              <cell>Oña sa Viernes caiha
<row><cell lang=en>Why so soon?                                    <cell>Mano in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a madali?
<row><cell lang=en>Because he has not gone to Manila               <cell>Cay uala sia mahanayon sa Manila
<row><cell lang=en>How long have those children been playing?      <cell>Dugay na ba n&gtilde;a nanagdula dula canang m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Since twelve o&apos;clock                            <cell>Cutub sa a las doce
<row><cell lang=en>Till what o&apos;clock will they be singing?         <cell>Asa cutub n&gtilde;a horasa managcanta sila?
<row><cell lang=en>Till one o&apos;clock                                <cell>Hasta sa a la una
<row><cell lang=en>Till noon                                       <cell>Hasta sa modto
<row><cell lang=en>Till evening                                    <cell>Hasta sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Till eight o&apos;clock in the evening               <cell>Hasta sa a las ocho sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Until morning                                   <cell>Hasta sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Till ten o&apos;clock in the morning                 <cell>Hasta sa a las diez sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>They will sing till day-break                  <cell>Man&gtilde;adlaoon sila sa pagcanta
<row><cell lang=en>They will not sing till night                   <cell>Dili cagabhian sila sa pagcanta
<row><cell lang=en>They were dancing till the sunrise              <cell>Guicabuntagan sila sa pagsayao
<row><cell lang=en>Have you not been there?                        <cell>Uala ba icao didto?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not                                      <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>What day of the month is it?                    <cell>Icapila quita caron?
<pb n=206 id=pb206><row><cell lang=en>It is the fifteenth                             <cell>Icapolo ug lima caron adlao
<row><cell lang=en>It is the seventh                               <cell>Icapito man caron
<row><cell lang=en>No, it is the eighth                            <cell>Dili, icaualo man
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is the sixth                         <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a caron mao ang icaunum
<row><cell lang=en>I will do it to-morrow                          <cell>Buhaton co cana ugma
<row><cell lang=en>I will do it in a week                          <cell>Buhaton co cana sa usa ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>I can build the house in a year                 <cell>Tingdugon co ang balay sa usa ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>I shall write a book in a month                 <cell>Sa usa ca bulan sulaton co ug usa ca libro
<row><cell lang=en>I shall call at you every other day             <cell>Duaon co icao sa icaduhang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Come before five o&apos;clock                        <cell>Muanhi ca sa dili pa las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>Come after five o&apos;clock                         <cell>Muanhi ca pasado na las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>Come about five o&apos;clock                         <cell>Muanhi ca sa a las cinco capin cun culang
<row><cell lang=en>I went there in the forenoon                  <cell>Didto aco sa uala pa las doce
<row><cell lang=en>I rise in the morning at seven o&apos;clock          <cell>Nagaban&gtilde;on aco sa a las siete sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Send it to me this morning                      <cell>Dad-i aco niana caron buntag
<row><cell lang=en>Come and spend the evening at my house          <cell>Oña sa hapon ari ca sa amo
<row><cell lang=en>I will call at you this evening                 <cell>Muduao aco canimo caron hapon
<pb n=207 id=pb207><row><cell lang=en>I was there yesterday                           <cell>Didto aco cahapon
<row><cell lang=en>He sent it to me two days after                 <cell>Guidad-an aco nia niana sa icaduhang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The year <corr sic="on ethousand">one thousand</corr>, nine hundred and four        <cell>Sa tuig sa usa ca libo, siam ca gatus ug upat
<row><cell lang=en>January the first                               <cell>Nahauna sa bulan sa Enero
<row><cell lang=en>May the sixth. 6th May                          <cell>Icaunum sa Mayo
<row><cell lang=en>5th August, 1904                                <cell>5 sa Agosto sa 1904
<row><cell lang=en>22nd March, 1903                                <cell>22 sa Marzo sa 1903
<row><cell lang=en>20th November                                   <cell>20 sa Noviembre
<row><cell lang=en>Cebu, September the third                       <cell>Sugbu, sa icatolo sa Setiembre
<row><cell lang=en>We expect him from day to day                   <cell>Canunay guipaabut namu sia
<row><cell lang=en>We shall go there one day or other              <cell>Usa ca adlao muadto came didto
<row><cell lang=en>I do it daily                                   <cell>Nagabuhat aco niana sa adlao adlao
<row><cell lang=en>I have been here a week                         <cell>Dinhi na aco usa ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>A daily paper                                   <cell>Usa ca mantala-an n&gtilde;a mugoa sa adlao adlao
<row><cell lang=en>A weekly bulletin                               <cell>Usa ca gaceta n&gtilde;a mugoa solosemana
<row><cell lang=en>A semi-weekly <corr sic=revew>review</corr>     <cell>Usa ca revista n&gtilde;a mugola sa macaduha sa usa ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>A monthly magazine                              <cell>Revista n&gtilde;a mugola sa bulan bulan
<pb n=208 id=pb208><row><cell lang=en>Is your watch right?                            <cell>Maayo ba ang paglacat sa horasan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is right                                     <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>It goes too fast                                <cell>Nagaona caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It goes too slow                                <cell>Naolahi sia caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It has stopped                                  <cell>Namatay sia
<row><cell lang=en>Wind up your watch                              <cell>Llavihi ang horasan mo
<row><cell lang=en>My watch stops now and then                     <cell>Usahay namatay sia
<row><cell lang=en>It is not right                                 <cell>Dili maayo ang lacat nia
<row><cell lang=en>How long did you stay here since your father went out?          <cell>Dugay ca ba dinhi cutub sa pagguican sa amahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I did three years                               <cell>Tolo na ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>It is two years since I saw your brother        <cell>Duha ca tuig na n&gtilde;a uala co maquita ang imong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>Has that man <corr>been </corr>waiting long?             <cell>Dugay na canang tao naghulat?
<row><cell lang=en>He has just come                                <cell>Bag-o pa miabut sia. Mao pa caron miabut sia
</table>


<div1 id=s65>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa tiempo.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How is the weather?           <cell>Naonsa ang tiempo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is very fine               <cell>Maayo man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is it fine weather?           <cell>Maayo ba ang tiempo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is fine weather       <cell>Oo, maayo man ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is beautiful weather       <cell>Maayo man caayo angtiempo
<pb n=209 id=pb209><row><cell lang=en>How was the weather yesterday?      <cell>Naonsa ba ang tiempo cahapon?
<row><cell lang=en>It was bad weather                  <cell>Dautan man tuod
<row><cell lang=en>It was very warm                    <cell>Mainit man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It was very cold                    <cell>Matugnao caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It was very windy                   <cell>Mahan&gtilde;in caayo
<row><cell lang=en>How is the weather to-day?          <cell>Naonsa ba ang tiempo caron?
<row><cell lang=en>The weather is settled              <cell>Maayo man caron
<row><cell lang=en>It is very sultry                   <cell>Guialindan&gtilde;an ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>The weather is unsettled            <cell>Nagalain lain ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It gets cloudy                      <cell>Magadagom. Dagoman ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is cloudy                        <cell>Guidagoman ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is windy                         <cell>Nahan&gtilde;in man
<row><cell lang=en>It is very windy                    <cell>Nacusug ang han&gtilde;in
<row><cell lang=en>The wind falls                      <cell>Nalinao man ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is foggy                         <cell>Nagabon man
<row><cell lang=en>It is changeable                    <cell>Lain man ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>The weather begins to clear up      <cell>Nahayag hayag na ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is mild                          <cell>Maayo man ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is damp                          <cell>Naomog ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>It is very hot                      <cell>Naigang caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It is dark                          <cell>Man&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it man
<row><cell lang=en>It is gloomy                        <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon man
<row><cell lang=en>It is clear                         <cell>Mahayag man
<row><cell lang=en>It is going to rain                 <cell>Magaolan cahá
<pb n=210 id=pb210><row><cell lang=en>I feel drops of rain                <cell>Nagatalisic na
<row><cell lang=en>It rains. It is raining             <cell>Nagaolan
<row><cell lang=en>It rains very fast                  <cell>Nagaolan ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>It pours. It is pouring             <cell>Nabascog caayo ang olan
<row><cell lang=en>It is only a shower                 <cell>Nagaolan n&gtilde;a binabaye
<row><cell lang=en>It does not rain                    <cell>Dili magaolan
<row><cell lang=en>It has left off raining             <cell>Natu-ang na man
<row><cell lang=en>Will it rain <corr sic="to morrow">to-morrow</corr>?             <cell>Magaolan ba caha ugma?
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps it will not                 <cell>Dili caha
<row><cell lang=en>Is it windy?                        <cell>Nahan&gtilde;in ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Does it thunder?                    <cell>Nagadalogdog ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Is it stormy?                       <cell>Nagaonos ba?
<row><cell lang=en>It is                               <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>It is not                           <cell>Uala. Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Does it drizzle?                    <cell>Nagatalisic ba?
<row><cell lang=en>No, it does not                     <cell>Uala man
<row><cell lang=en>Is the weather stormy?              <cell>Nagaonos ba ang tiempo?
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have a storm               <cell>Magaonos. Abutan quita sa onos
<row><cell lang=en>Do you hear the thunder?            <cell>Nadun&gtilde;ug ba nimo ang dalogdog?
<row><cell lang=en>I do                                <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>I hear the roaring <corr sic=ef>of</corr> the thunder   <cell>Nadun&gtilde;ug co n&gtilde;a nagadagooc
<row><cell lang=en>Is it thundering?                   <cell>Nagadalogdog ba?
<row><cell lang=en>It is thundering and lightening     <cell>Nagadalogdog ug nan&gtilde;ilat
<row><cell lang=en>It lightens                         <cell>Nan&gtilde;ilat
<row><cell lang=en>The weather clears up               <cell>Nan&gtilde;ayao na ang tiempo
<pb n=211 id=pb211><row><cell lang=en>It clears up                                    <cell>Napuao na
<row><cell lang=en>Of what were you speaking when I came in?       <cell>Onsay guipanagpamulong niño sa pagsulud co?
<row><cell lang=en>We were speaking of the weather                 <cell>Nanagpulong pulong came sa tun&gtilde;ud sa tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>Can you learn by heart when it is very cold?            <cell>Mahimo ca ba magasaolo cun matugnao ang tiempo?
<row><cell lang=en>Better than when it is warm                     <cell>Maayo pa cay cun mainit
<row><cell lang=en>If it is fine weather to-day I will have the pleasure of seeing you             <cell>Cun maayo unta ang tiempo caron adlaua muadto aco sa pagquita canimo
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock?                                <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas iadto mo?
<row><cell lang=en>At five o&apos;clock, or earlier if I can            <cell>Sa a las cinco, cun masayo pa ug dao mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Did you hear the thunder last night?            <cell>Nadun&gtilde;ug mo ba ang dalogdog gabi-i?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it was a terrible storm, and it rained in torrents         <cell>Oo, daco caayo ang onos ug nabascug uyamut ang olan
<row><cell lang=en>I hope we shall have good weather to-morrow             <cell>Basin n&gtilde;a magmaayo ang tiempo ugma
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you close your eyes?                     <cell>N&gtilde;ano nagapid-oc ca sa mata?
<pb n=212 id=pb212><row><cell lang=en>Because the sun is in my face                   <cell>Cay guisulao aco sa adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Does the sun shine?                             <cell>Nagaadlao ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it does                                    <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>It is day-light                                 <cell>Nalamdag man
<row><cell lang=en>It is night                                     <cell>Nagabi-i man
<row><cell lang=en>It is very dark                                 <cell>Man&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it caayo
<row><cell lang=en>It is moon-light                                <cell>Bolanon man
<row><cell lang=en>We shall have a fine day                        <cell>Magmaayo caayo ang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The sun shines                                  <cell>Nahayag ang adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Will you go to my house to-morrow?              <cell>Buut ca ba umari sa amo ugma?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will go at sunrise                     <cell>Oo, muadto aco sa pagcasilang sa adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Go at sunset                                    <cell>Muadto ca sa pagcasalup
<row><cell lang=en>See, what a beautiful rain-bow!                 <cell>Tanaua, pagcamanindut sa balan&gtilde;ao!
<row><cell lang=en>The days are growing long                       <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a adlao nanaganam
<row><cell lang=en>The days are decreasing                         <cell>Nagdiotay diotay ang m&gtilde;a adlao
<row><cell lang=en>The days are very short                         <cell>Hamubo man caayo ang m&gtilde;a adlao
<row><cell lang=en>I am warm                                       <cell>Mainit aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am cold                                       <cell>Mabugnao aco. Guitugnao aco
<row><cell lang=en>Are you warm?                                   <cell>Mainit ca ba? Nainitan ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>Are you not warm?                               <cell>Di ba mainit ca?
<pb n=213 id=pb213><row><cell lang=en>Are you not cold?                               <cell>Di ba mabugnao ca?
<row><cell lang=en>It is very warm                                 <cell>Mainit man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am quite wet                                  <cell>Nahomod aco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am wet through                                <cell>Nahomod aco tood
<row><cell lang=en>Dry your clothes                                <cell>Bulalon mo ang imong visti
<row><cell lang=en>It does not rain, let us hurry back             <cell>Nato-ang na, tala na mupauli sa madali
<row><cell lang=en>What is that?                                   <cell>Onsa ba cana?
<row><cell lang=en>It is wind blows hard                           <cell>Ang han&gtilde;in n&gtilde;a nan&gtilde;usug caayo
<row><cell lang=en>The wind is turned                              <cell>Nabalhin ang han&gtilde;in
<row><cell lang=en>See how it rains                                <cell>Tanaua ang olan
<row><cell lang=en>Let us shelter ourselves                        <cell>Panilong quita
<row><cell lang=en>I am starving with cold                         <cell>Nan&gtilde;urut curut aco sa catugnao
</table>



<div1 id=s66>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a noticia.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Is there any news?                              <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>There is no news                                <cell>Ualay m&gtilde;a noticia
<row><cell lang=en>Is there anything new?                          <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>There is nothing new                            <cell>Ualay bisan onsang noticia
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know anything new?                       <cell>Nahibalo ca ba ug bisan onsang balita?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not                                        <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>What is the news?                               <cell>Onsa ba ang m&gtilde;a noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>We have no news                                 <cell>Uala came ug m&gtilde;a noticia
<pb n=214 id=pb214><row><cell lang=en>What news is there?                             <cell>Onsay m&gtilde;a noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>There is good news                              <cell>Dunay m&gtilde;a noticia n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>There is bad news                               <cell>Dautan man ang m&gtilde;a noticia
<row><cell lang=en>Have you got anything to tell me?               <cell>Duna bay imong isuluguilon canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>I have got nothing                              <cell>Uala acoy isuluguilon canimo
<row><cell lang=en>What is the talk about town?                    <cell>Onsay m&gtilde;a balita sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>There is no talk of anything                    <cell>Ualay bisan onsang balita
<row><cell lang=en>Have you not heard of anything?                 <cell>Uala camo noticiahi sa bisan onsa?
<row><cell lang=en>We have not heard of anything                   <cell>Uala came macadun&gtilde;ug ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>What is the news in your quarter?               <cell>Onsay m&gtilde;a noticia sa iño?
<row><cell lang=en>The news are very bad                           <cell>Dautan caayo ang m&gtilde;a noticia
<row><cell lang=en>This is a good news                             <cell>Maayo man quining noticia
<row><cell lang=en>This is a bad news                              <cell>Dautan man quining noticia
<row><cell lang=en>I have heard that your mother is sick           <cell>Guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a masaquit ang inahan mo
<row><cell lang=en>It is not true                                  <cell>Dili matuod
<row><cell lang=en>I have not heard of that                        <cell>Uala aco noticiahi niana
<row><cell lang=en>Did you read the papers?                        <cell>Guibasa mo ba ang m&gtilde;a mantala-an?
<pb n=215 id=pb215><row><cell lang=en>What do the papers say?                         <cell>Onsay guisuguilon sa m&gtilde;a mantala-an?
<row><cell lang=en>I have read no papers to-day                    <cell>Uala co basaha ang m&gtilde;a mantala-an caron adlaua
<row><cell lang=en>Did you read that in any paper?                 <cell>Guibasa mo ba cana sa mantala-an?
<row><cell lang=en>It is only mentioned in a private letter        <cell>Guisuguid man cana sa usa ca sulat lamang
<row><cell lang=en>Do they say who received that letter?           <cell>Guibalaod ba cun quinsay nacadauat nianang sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>No, they do not                                 <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>They will not tell who received that letter     <cell>Dili buut sila magsuguilon cun quinsa man ang nacadauat nianang sulat
<row><cell lang=en>From whom have you had that news?               <cell>Quinsa ang naghatag canimo nianang noticia?
<row><cell lang=en>I have that news from the president of the town         <cell>Guihatagan aco nianang noticia sa presidente sa longsod
<row><cell lang=en>I have a very good news                         <cell>Duna acoy usa ca noticia n&gtilde;a maayo caayo
<row><cell lang=en>How do you know that?                           <cell>N&gtilde;ano nahibalo ca niana?
<row><cell lang=en>That report has proved false                    <cell>Bacac man, cono, canang suguilon
<row><cell lang=en>Do they still talk of war?                      <cell>Duna pay m&gtilde;a noticia sa guerra?
<pb n=216 id=pb216><row><cell lang=en>Do they think we shall have peace?              <cell>Guihuna huna ba sa m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a maquigdaet ang m&gtilde;a nanagpangubat?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not likely                                <cell>Dili daguay
<row><cell lang=en>Have you received any letter from your brother?         <cell>Nadauat mo ba ug sulat sa imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you heard from your father?                <cell>Duna bay noticia mo sa imong amahan?
<row><cell lang=en>I expect to hear from him                       <cell>Guipaabut co ug m&gtilde;a noticia cania
<row><cell lang=en>I have received a letter from him yesterday     <cell>Nadauat co ug sulat nia cahapon
<row><cell lang=en>What does he say to you from Manila?            <cell>Onsay guisuguilon nia canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>He gives me many news                           <cell>Daghan ang m&gtilde;a noticia n&gtilde;a guisuguilon nia canaco
</table>


<div1 id=s67>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa edad.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>How old are you?                                <cell>Pila na ang edad mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What is your age?                               <cell>Pilay edad mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What may your age be?                           <cell>Pila na caiha ang edad mo?
<row><cell lang=en>How old is he?                                  <cell>Pilay edad nia?
<row><cell lang=en>He will be twelve years the fifteenth of next month             <cell>Napolo ug duha ca tuig na sa icapolo ug lima sa bulan n&gtilde;a umalabut
<pb n=217 id=pb217><row><cell lang=en>He shall soon be ten                            <cell>Di na madugay napolo na sia ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>I am twenty-five                                <cell>Caloha-an ug lima ca tuig na ang edad co
<row><cell lang=en>How old is your father?                         <cell>Pilay edad sa imong amahan?
<row><cell lang=en>He is fifty years old                           <cell>Calim-an na ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>What is your brother&apos;s age?                     <cell>Pila na ang edad sa igso-on mo?
<row><cell lang=en>He is not yet forty                             <cell>Uala pa sia capatan ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>How old is your sister?                         <cell>Pilay edad sa imong igso-on n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>She is not yet of age                           <cell>Bata pa sia
<row><cell lang=en>She is more than seven                          <cell>Capin na sia sa pito ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>How old may this child be?                      <cell>Pila caiha ang edad niining bata?
<row><cell lang=en>He is only six years old                        <cell>Unum ca tuig da
<row><cell lang=en>He is almost eight                              <cell>Hapit na sia sa ualo ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>He is about ten                                 <cell>Napolo ca tuig capin cun culang
<row><cell lang=en>He is tall for his age                          <cell>Labihan ang cata-as nia
<row><cell lang=en>How old is Miss Mary?                           <cell>Pila na ang edad ni Maria?
<row><cell lang=en>She is twenty-two                               <cell>Caloha-an ug duha na
<row><cell lang=en>I am older than she                             <cell>Magulang aco nia
<row><cell lang=en>Your uncle must be very near forty-five years           <cell>Ang edad sa imong oyoan hapit na daguay sa capatan ug lima
<pb n=218 id=pb218><row><cell lang=en>He is in his forty-second year                  <cell>Capatan ug duha pa ca tuig ang edad nia
<row><cell lang=en>He is in the prime of life                      <cell>Ang iyang edad mao ang labing an&gtilde;ay sa paghiagom pa sa quinabuhi
<row><cell lang=en>Your grandfather looks very aged                <cell>Ang apohan mo nagapacatigulang na
<row><cell lang=en>How old do you think he is?                     <cell>Sa imong paminao, pila na caha ang edad nia?
<row><cell lang=en>I think he is about eighty                      <cell>Caualoan ca tuig daguay
<row><cell lang=en>He is eighty-four                               <cell>Caualoan ug upat na
<row><cell lang=en>He is older than I                              <cell>Magulang sia canaco
<row><cell lang=en>I think he cannot be more than eighty           <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a uala pa sia mulabao sa caualoan
<row><cell lang=en>I did not think him so old                      <cell>Naco, n&gtilde;a dili pa sia tigulang caayo
<row><cell lang=en>He carries his age well                         <cell>Maayo man ang pagcatigulang nia
<row><cell lang=en>Is your father still living?                    <cell>Buhi pa ang amahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>He must be very old                             <cell>Tigulang man sia daguay
<row><cell lang=en>He is just entering into his hundredth          <cell>Guisugdan na nia ang icausa ca gatus
<row><cell lang=en>He has become quite childish                    <cell>Olianon man sia
<row><cell lang=en>When is your birthday?                          <cell>Canosa bay imong adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>It was the seventh of last month                <cell>Sa icapito ca adlao sa bulan n&gtilde;a miagui
</table>


<pb n=219 id=pb219>
<div1 id=s68>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagpan&gtilde;utana tun&gtilde;ud sa usa ca tao.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have the goodness to tell me where is your father?             <cell>Mahagugma ca ba sa pagpahibalo canaco cun hain ba ang amahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you tell me who is that man?               <cell>Buut ca ba magpahibalo canaco cun quinsa ba cadtong tao?
<row><cell lang=en>Where does Mr. John live?                       <cell>Hain nagapuyo si Sr. Juan?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know Mr. Paul?                           <cell>Nacaila ca ba can Don Pablo?
<row><cell lang=en>No, Sir, I do not                               <cell>Uala, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know anybody of that name here         <cell>Uala co maila ug tao nianang n&gtilde;alana dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, Sir, I know him                            <cell>Oo, Señor, naila co
<row><cell lang=en>I know him very well                            <cell>Naila co sia caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I have the honor of knowing him                 <cell>Nacaila aco cania
<row><cell lang=en>Will you favor me with his address?             <cell>Buut mong pagtodlo canaco sa ila?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will                                     <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>In what street does he live?                    <cell>Sa onsang dalana nagapuyo sia?
<row><cell lang=en>He lives in Butuan-street                       <cell>Nagapuyo sa dalan sa Butuan
<row><cell lang=en>He lives near the church                        <cell>Nagapuyo sia dool sa singbahan
<pb n=220 id=pb220><row><cell lang=en>He lives in front of the College                <cell>Nagapuyo sia atbang sa Colegio
<row><cell lang=en>His house stands on the outside of the city             <cell>Ang balay nia tua sa gauas sa ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>It is far from here, is it not?                 <cell>Halayo man dinhi, di ba mao?
<row><cell lang=en>It is but two steps off                         <cell>Dool man. Dili halayo
<row><cell lang=en>Can you direct me to his house?                 <cell>Mahimo mong pagpahatod canaco sa balay nia?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going that way myself                      <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco nianang dalana
<row><cell lang=en>I will show you his house                       <cell>Ihatod co icao sa iyang balay
<row><cell lang=en>It is very far from here                        <cell>Halayo caayo dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>In that case I will take a hackney coach        <cell>Sa in&gtilde;on niana muabang aco sa usa ca carruage
<row><cell lang=en>Call for a coach                                <cell>Ipadala aco ug usa ca carruage
<row><cell lang=en>Conductor, drive me to the Bank-street          <cell>Cochero, dada aco sa dalan sa Banco
<row><cell lang=en>Stop at this house                              <cell>Muhunung ca diha nianang balay
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you wish to go now?                    <cell>Asa ca buut mong pagadto caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to go to the Custom-house                <cell>Buut aco muadto sa Aduana
<row><cell lang=en>On the right side going up                      <cell>Padayon ca dapit sa too
<pb n=221 id=pb221><row><cell lang=en>On the left side going down                     <cell>Padayon ca manugbong dapit sa uala
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know my father?                          <cell>Naila mo ba ang acong tatay?
<row><cell lang=en>No, but I wish very much to make my acquaintance with him               <cell>Uala, apan buut aco caayo macaila cania
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know the president of the town?          <cell>Nacaila ca ba sa presidente sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do                                       <cell>Oo, naila co
<row><cell lang=en>Are you acquainted with that woman?             <cell>Nacaila ca ba nianang babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am                                       <cell>Oo, naila co
<row><cell lang=en>I am acquainted with her                        <cell>Nacaila aco cania
<row><cell lang=en>Is she married or single?                       <cell>Miño man sia cun dalaga ba?
<row><cell lang=en>She is married                                  <cell>Miño man
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know her husband?                        <cell>Nacaila ca ba sa iyang bana?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know him                               <cell>Dili aco macaila cania
<row><cell lang=en>Where is now your sister?                       <cell>Hain ba caron ang igso-on mo n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know if she is in the ball             <cell>Ambut cun didto ba sia sa sayaoan
<row><cell lang=en>Tell her to come to my house this evening       <cell>Paarion mo sia sa amo caron hapon
</table>



<pb n=222 id=pb222>
<div1 id=s69>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagpaquigsabut sa usa ca tao.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What shall we do?                               <cell>Onsay bubuhaton ta?
<row><cell lang=en>What have we to do?                             <cell>Onsa may atung bubuhaton?
<row><cell lang=en>What are we to do to get the money?             <cell>Onsa may atung bubuhaton sa pagdan&gtilde;at sa salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>What course remains for us to take?             <cell>Onsa pay agui n&gtilde;a atung tutumanon?
<row><cell lang=en>What is to be done?                             <cell>Onsay bubuhaton?
<row><cell lang=en>I am quite puzzled                              <cell>Nalibog aco
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know what to do                        <cell>Ambut cun onsay bubuhaton co
<row><cell lang=en>I am greatly embarrassed                        <cell>Nasamocan aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>We are very perplexed                           <cell>Guibodcan came ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>If I were you                                   <cell>Ug aco pa icao
<row><cell lang=en>If I were in your place                         <cell>Ug aco pa diha sa imong lugar. Ug aco pa muilis canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I advise you to do that                         <cell>Magasambag aco canimo sa pagbuhat niana
<row><cell lang=en>I am of opinion that you should go there        <cell>Sa acong pagpalabay maayo n&gtilde;a muadto ca didto
<row><cell lang=en>If you will take my advice you will do it       <cell>Cun matuman mo ang acong sambag buhaton mo cana
<pb n=223 id=pb223><row><cell lang=en>An idea strikes me                              <cell>Guilagdupan aco sa usa ca huna huna
<row><cell lang=en>I have been thinking of that                    <cell>Da-an guihuna huna co cana
<row><cell lang=en>Let me alone                                    <cell>Pasagdi aco
<row><cell lang=en>Let us do one thing                             <cell>Tumanon ta ang usa ca butang
<row><cell lang=en>I have changed my mind                          <cell>Lain na man ang huna huna co
<row><cell lang=en>Let us do otherwise                             <cell>Tumanon ta ug lain agui
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go another way to work                   <cell>Pilion ta ug lain agui sa pagbuhat
<row><cell lang=en>What do you say about it?                       <cell>Onsay pulong mo sa tun&gtilde;ud niini?
<row><cell lang=en>I think as you do                               <cell>Ang acong huna huna mao da man sa imo
<row><cell lang=en>Would it not be better to buy the house?        <cell>Di ba maayo pa n&gtilde;a paliton ang balay?
<row><cell lang=en>It is the best we can do                        <cell>Mao cana ang labing maayo n&gtilde;a arang icabuhat ta
<row><cell lang=en>It is the only thing we have to do              <cell>Mao da cana ang igabuhat ta
<row><cell lang=en>That is the only course we can take             <cell>Mao da canang alaguian ang arang ta pagasondon
<row><cell lang=en>Let us do it                                    <cell>Magbuhat quita niana
<row><cell lang=en>Are you sure of what you say?                   <cell>Guihuna huna mo ba ug maayo ang imong guipamulong?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am                                       <cell>Oo
<pb n=224 id=pb224><row><cell lang=en>I have no doubt about it                        <cell>Uala acoy duha duha niana
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is                                   <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a mao
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is not                               <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a dili mao
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is not true                          <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a dili matuod
<row><cell lang=en>Nothing is more certain                         <cell>Ualay lain n&gtilde;a matuod pa niana
<row><cell lang=en>I answer for it                                 <cell>Aco lamang cun dili mao cana ogaling
<row><cell lang=en>I don&apos;t think so                                <cell>Dili aco maghuna huna sa in&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>It is a story                                   <cell>Bacac man cana
</table>



<div1 id=s70>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcahigala.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>He is my friend                                 <cell>Higala nacu sia
<row><cell lang=en>Dennis is my best friend                        <cell>Si Dionisio mao ang labing maayong higala co
<row><cell lang=en>Miss Blanch is my intimate friend               <cell>Si Srta. Blanca mao ang abian co n&gtilde;a saliganan
<row><cell lang=en>We are intimate friends                         <cell>Amigos man quita caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am sincerely attached to her                  <cell>Guihigugma co sia sa gugma n&gtilde;a quinasing casing
<row><cell lang=en>Our friendship is reciprocal                    <cell>Nasighigugma came
<row><cell lang=en>Our tempers are alike                           <cell>Magsama man ang atung m&gtilde;a gaui
<pb n=225 id=pb225><row><cell lang=en>We are closely united                           <cell>Nanagusa came sa usa ca gugma n&gtilde;a matuod
<row><cell lang=en>We agree perfectly well                         <cell>Nanagoyon came sa usa ca pagoyon n&gtilde;a hingpit
<row><cell lang=en>He has given me many proofs of his friendship           <cell>Guitaga-an aco nia ug daghang m&gtilde;a tima-an sa iyang pagcahigala
<row><cell lang=en>I hope we shall never part                      <cell>Basin n&gtilde;a dili quita magbulag sa guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>I felt an attachment for him the first time I met him           <cell>Cutub sa nahaunang pagquita co cania minbati aco ug usa ca dacong gugma cania
<row><cell lang=en>We love each other like brothers                <cell>Nasighigugma came in&gtilde;on sa m&gtilde;a igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>There is <corr sic=not>no</corr> secret between us      <cell>Uala canamo ug bisan onsa n&gtilde;a tinago
<row><cell lang=en>I would do anything for him                     <cell>Tun&gtilde;ud cania buhaton co unta ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>I love him very much for he is very attentive           <cell>Guihigugma co sia ug maayo cay maabi-abihon <corr sic=ma>man</corr> sia
<row><cell lang=en>Nobody esteems you more than I                  <cell>Ualay mahagugma canimo main&gtilde;on canaco
<row><cell lang=en>He is the best of my friends                    <cell>Sia mao ang labing daco sa m&gtilde;a higala naco
<row><cell lang=en>My dear friend, do you not pity me?             <cell>Abian co n&gtilde;a hinigugma, di ca ba malooy canaco?
<pb n=226 id=pb226><row><cell lang=en>I will pity you with all my heart               <cell>Caloy-an ta icao sa tibooc n&gtilde;a casing casing co
<row><cell lang=en>To deceive a friend is a very unworthy action           <cell>Maoy usa ca buhat n&gtilde;a dili tacus ang paglimbong sa usa ca higala
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like our neighbor?                       <cell>Nahagugma ca ba sa atung silin&gtilde;an?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not                                        <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>I dislike that man for he is very proud         <cell>Dili aco mahagugma nianang tao cay palabilabihon man sia caayo
</table>



<div1 id=s71>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa tao ug sa m&gtilde;a caubanan nia.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where has my little sister been to-day?         <cell>Diin ang acong manghod carong adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>She has been at her friend&apos;s                    <cell>Didto sia sa balay sa iyang m&gtilde;a higala
<row><cell lang=en>Doing what?                                     <cell>Naonsa sia didto?
<row><cell lang=en>Studying her Spanish lesson                     <cell>Guiestudio nia ang iyang lesion sa quinachila
<row><cell lang=en>Are you a bachelor?                             <cell>Olitao ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I am married                                    <cell>Miño man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Who is your wife?                               <cell>Quinsa ba ang asaua mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Jane, the daughter of the president             <cell>Si Juana, anac sa presidente
<row><cell lang=en>Are you a widow?                                <cell>Balo ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes                                             <cell>Oo
<pb n=227 id=pb227><row><cell lang=en>Who was your husband?                           <cell>Quinsa ba ang imong bana?
<row><cell lang=en>Henry                                           <cell>Si Enrique
<row><cell lang=en>Is it long since he was dead?                   <cell>Dugay na ba n&gtilde;a namatay sia?
<row><cell lang=en>It is five years ago                            <cell>Lima na ca tuig
<row><cell lang=en>Which of these boys is the best?                <cell>Quinsa ang labing maayo niining m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Jack is the best and I have always esteemed him very much       <cell>Si Juanito man ang labing maayo ug guipalangga co sia tinood
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know Mr. John?                           <cell>Nacaila ca ba can Don Juan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, he belongs to a very good family           <cell>Oo, nahatun&gtilde;ud sia sa usa ca banay n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Did you know his forefathers?                 <cell>Naila mo ba ang iyang m&gtilde;a guinicanan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, and they were very rich                    <cell>Oo, ug salapian man caayo sila
<row><cell lang=en>How many brothers are they?                     <cell>Pila ca magso-on sila?
<row><cell lang=en>They are two only, and they do not love each other very much though they are twins      <cell>Duha da, ug sila masighigugma caayo bisan caluha man sila
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any children?                          <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a anac?
<row><cell lang=en>I have none                                     <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>Did you know your grandfather?                  <cell>Nacaabut ba icao sa imong apohan?
<pb n=228 id=pb228><row><cell lang=en>Yes, I did                                      <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Are you a relation of Mr. Emanuel?              <cell>Macaubanan ba camo si D. Manuel?
<row><cell lang=en>I am not                                        <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>How many brothers are you?                      <cell>Pila camo magso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>We are four                                     <cell>Upat
<row><cell lang=en>Have your brothers any children?                <cell>Duna bay anac sa imong m&gtilde;a igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>The elder has two<corr sic="ones">, a</corr> daughter and a son         <cell>Ang magulang may duha ca booc, ang usang babaye ug ang icaduhang lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>Is it you the brother of my friend?             <cell>Icao ba ang igso-on sa acong amigos?
<row><cell lang=en>It is I                                         <cell>Aco man
<row><cell lang=en>Are our neighbors so indigent as they said?     <cell>Ang atong m&gtilde;a silin&gtilde;an pobres ba in&gtilde;on sa ilang guiasuy?
<row><cell lang=en>They are not                                    <cell>Dili man gayud
<row><cell lang=en>Did you go to see my father yesterday?          <cell>Didto ba icao cahapon sa paquigquita sa acong atan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but he was not at home                     <cell>Oo, apan uala sia sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>How many children has Mr. Edward?               <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a bata ni D. Eduardo?
<row><cell lang=en>Two sons and three daughters                    <cell>Duhang lalaqui ug totolong babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Well, have you seen your uncle?                 <cell>Maayo, naquita mo ba ang imong oyo-an?
<pb n=229 id=pb229><row><cell lang=en>Yes, he was with my father and both were speaking of the marriage of my sister          <cell>Oo, didto sia uban sa acong amahan nanagpulong pulong sila sa tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcasal ni inday
<row><cell lang=en>Is your sister going to be married?             <cell>Mamiño ba caha ang imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>She is, certainly                               <cell>Oo, mamiño gayud sia
<row><cell lang=en>With whom?                                      <cell>Quinsa ba ang palamanhon nia?
<row><cell lang=en>With Thomas                                     <cell>Si Tomás
<row><cell lang=en>Is Mary pleasant with him?                      <cell>Nahagugma ba cania si María?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, she is indeed because she spoke with my mother about her marriage          <cell>Oo, nahagugma sia gayud cay iyang guipamulon&gtilde;an ang acong anan sa tun&gtilde;ud sa iyang pagcasal
<row><cell lang=en>When will the wedding take place?               <cell>Anosa pacasal sila?
<row><cell lang=en>On next Saturday                                <cell>Oña sa Sábado
<row><cell lang=en>Who is that maid?                               <cell>Quinsa ba canang dalaga?
<row><cell lang=en>She is the daughter of my aunt                  <cell>Mao ang anac sa acong iya-an
<row><cell lang=en>So that, you are first cousins                  <cell>Busa, magagao itagsa man camo
<row><cell lang=en>When will you be married?                       <cell>Anosa ca man&gtilde;asaua?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know, I do not yet like to take a wife         <cell>Ambut, dili pa aco buut man&gtilde;asaua
<pb n=230 id=pb230><row><cell lang=en>Have you a step-father?                         <cell>Duna bay imong ama ama?
<row><cell lang=en>No, but I have a step-daughter, for I am married to a widow with a daughter             <cell>Uala, apan may acong usa ca hinabdos n&gtilde;a babaye cay nan&gtilde;asaua aco sa usa ca balo n&gtilde;a may usa ca anac
<row><cell lang=en>Where does your uncle live?                     <cell>Hain nagapuyo ang imong oyo-an?
<row><cell lang=en>He lives now in Cebu                            <cell>Sia nagapuyo caron sa Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>Whose are these children?                       <cell>Cansa ba quining m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>They are my brother&apos;s                           <cell>Sa acong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>How many has he?                                <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a bata nia?
<row><cell lang=en>Five ones                                       <cell>Lilima
<row><cell lang=en>The elder one is a boy                          <cell>Ang magulang lalaqui man
<row><cell lang=en>The youngest is a girl                          <cell>Babaye man ang quinamanghulan
<row><cell lang=en>How many relations have you?                    <cell>Daghan ba ang m&gtilde;a caubanan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I have two male and four female cousins         <cell>Duha ca igagao n&gtilde;a lalaqui ug upat n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Will you esteem my children as much as I do yours?              <cell>Mahagugma ca ba sa acong m&gtilde;a bata in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a guihigugma co ang imo?
<pb n=231 id=pb231><row><cell lang=en>I will esteem them very much if they are humble and obedient as mine; but if they are naughty and proud, I will despise them            <cell>Higugmaon co sila caayo cun mapaubsanon ug matinahoron sila unta main&gtilde;on sa aco; apan cun dautan ug palabilabihon sila ogaling pasipad-an co sila
<row><cell lang=en>Will that child cry if they do not give him the meal he is asking?              <cell>Muhilac ba canang bata cun dili taga-an sia sa calanon n&gtilde;a iyang guipan&gtilde;ayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I believe so, for he is the most willful boy I have seen in my life     <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali caha, cay sia mao ang bata n&gtilde;a labing magbubuut n&gtilde;a hinquit-an co cutub
<row><cell lang=en>Are you loved by your parents?                  <cell>Guihigugma ca ba sa imong m&gtilde;a guinicanan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, very much                                  <cell>Oo, daco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>What countryman are you?                        <cell>Taga diin ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I am from Spain                                 <cell>Taga España
<row><cell lang=en>I am a Spaniard                                 <cell>Cachila man aco
<row><cell lang=en>What countrywoman are you?                      <cell>Taga diin ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I am a Spanish woman                            <cell>Taga España
<row><cell lang=en>What countryman is that?<note n=1 lang=ceb>Cun lalaqui unta ang pan&gtilde;utanon mo taga diin ba sia, in&gtilde;non mo sa iningles: <hi>what countryman are you?</hi>; apan cun babaye sia ogaling, ingna: <hi>what countrywoman are you?</hi> Labi pang masayon mao ang pagin&gtilde;on: <hi>from where are you?</hi> cun <hi>where are you from?</hi></note>       <cell>Taga diin ba canang tao?
<pb n=232 id=pb232><row><cell lang=en>He is from Manila                               <cell>Taga Manila man sia
<row><cell lang=en>He is a native of these Islands                 <cell>Taga Filipinas man sia
<row><cell lang=en>He is a <corr sic=filipino>Filipino</corr>                                <cell>Filipino man sia
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you from?                             <cell>Taga diin ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I am from Cebu                                  <cell>Sugbuanon aco. Taga Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>Are you from Bohol?                             <cell>Boholanon ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I am from Mindanao                          <cell>Dili, taga Mindanao aco
<row><cell lang=en>From what province?                             <cell>Sa onsang provincia?
<row><cell lang=en>From Misamis                                    <cell>Sa Misamis
<row><cell lang=en>I am an Englishman                              <cell>Taga Inglaterra man aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am from United States                         <cell>Taga Estados Unidos man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Are they French?                                <cell>Taga Francia ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                                   <cell>Ambut
<row><cell lang=en>Are they not from England?                      <cell>Di ba sila taga Inglaterra?
<row><cell lang=en>They are                                        <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>What is your name?                              <cell>Quinsay n&gtilde;alan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>My name is William                              <cell>Si Guillermo
<row><cell lang=en>What is the name of your mother?                <cell>Quinsay n&gtilde;alan sa imong nanay?
<row><cell lang=en>Her name is Catherine                           <cell>Si Catalina
</table>



<div1 id=s72>
<head>Paquigpulong sa paghinagbo sa usa ca tao.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good afternoon, Madam                           <cell>Maayong palis, Señora
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do?                                  <cell>Comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                                       <cell>Maayo sa calooy sa Dios
<pb n=233 id=pb233><row><cell lang=en>Good evening, Miss                              <cell>Maayong hapon, Señorita
<row><cell lang=en>How are you?                                    <cell>Comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, thank you                            <cell>Maayo man, diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Good evening, Sir                               <cell>Maayong gabi-i, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Are you well?                                   <cell>Maayo ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I am very well, and you?                        <cell>Maayo man, ug icao?
<row><cell lang=en>I am well also                                  <cell>Maayo aco usab
<row><cell lang=en>I am quite well, thank you                      <cell>Maayo man aco, diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am very glad to see you in good health                <cell>Nalipay aco sa pagquita canimo n&gtilde;a mapiscay ug lauas
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, Sir                               <cell>Maayong buntag, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, Gentlemen                       <cell>Maayong odto, Señores
<row><cell lang=en>Good day, Misses                                <cell>Maayong adlao, Señoritas
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do, Ladies?                          <cell>Comosta camo, m&gtilde;a Señora<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>How are you, Miss?                              <cell>Comusta ca, Señorita?
<row><cell lang=en>Pretty well, so so                              <cell>Maayo ayo, arang arang
<row><cell lang=en>I am very glad of it                            <cell>Nalipay aco caayo niana
<row><cell lang=en>I did not think to meet you here                <cell>Uala co mahunahuna ang pagquita canimo dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do, Mr. John?                        <cell>Comusta ca, Sr. Juan?
<row><cell lang=en>I am well                                       <cell>Sa calooy sa Dios
<pb n=234 id=pb234><row><cell lang=en>I am glad to see you                            <cell>Nalipay aco sa pagquita canimo
<row><cell lang=en>How is your daughter?                           <cell>Comusta ang anac mo n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>She is now suffering from <corr sic=athsma>asthma</corr>                <cell>Guicotasan man sia caron
<row><cell lang=en>You look well now                               <cell>Maayo ang imong daguay caron
<row><cell lang=en>Have you seen your sons?                        <cell>Naquita mo ba ang imong m&gtilde;a anac n&gtilde;a lalaqui?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, and I scolded them very much for they are always fighting          <cell>Oo, ug guicasaban co sila ug maayo cay canunay naquigauay sila
<row><cell lang=en>Why so?                                         <cell>Onsay guiauayan nila?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know, it may be because the eldest has many pretty toys                <cell>Ambut, tin&gtilde;ali mao cay ang magulang may daghang m&gtilde;a dula-an n&gtilde;a maanindut
<row><cell lang=en>You ought to inquire after that subject         <cell>Icao nagsusi unta niana
<row><cell lang=en>What is that to you?                            <cell>Onsay labot mo sa acong buhat?
<row><cell lang=en>I can advise to you about that                  <cell>Arang aco macasambag canimo sa tun&gtilde;ud niana
<row><cell lang=en>I do not want your advices                      <cell>Dili aco magaquinahanglan sa imong m&gtilde;a sambag
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, Miss Mary                         <cell>Maayong buntag, Señorita María
<row><cell lang=en>When did you return?                            <cell>Canosa nahauli ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Yesterday morning                               <cell>Cahapon sa buntag
<pb n=235 id=pb235><row><cell lang=en>How did you like your journey?                  <cell>Nahagugma ca ba sa imong viaje?
<row><cell lang=en>I have had a very pleasant journey              <cell>Oo, maayo caayo ang acong viaje
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you come from?                         <cell>Diin ca guican?
<row><cell lang=en>I am coming from Manila                         <cell>Guican aco sa Manila
<row><cell lang=en>How is Mr. Edward?                              <cell>Comusta si D. Eduardo<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>He is indisposed                                <cell>Nadaut sia
<row><cell lang=en>How is Miss Monica?                             <cell>Comusta si Srta. Mónica?
<row><cell lang=en>He is sick                                      <cell>Masaquit sia
<row><cell lang=en>What is her illness?                            <cell>Onsa ba ang saquit nia?
<row><cell lang=en>She has caught a severe cold                    <cell>Nasip-on sia ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>How is your wife?                               <cell>Comusta ang imong asaua?
<row><cell lang=en>She is very well                                <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>How is your mother?                             <cell>Comusta ang inahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>She is very sick now                            <cell>Malisud man sia caron
<row><cell lang=en>She is dying                                    <cell>Mamalatay sia
<row><cell lang=en>I am very sorry for it                          <cell>Nasubu aco caayo tun&gtilde;ud niana
<row><cell lang=en>How is your family?                             <cell>Comusta ang imong m&gtilde;a loon?
<row><cell lang=en>How are your children?                          <cell>Maayo ba ang imong m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>They are all very well                          <cell>Mapiscay man silang tanan
<row><cell lang=en>What made you come so soon?                     <cell>N&gtilde;ano cay mianhi ca in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a madali?
<pb n=236 id=pb236><row><cell lang=en>Some business called me here                    <cell>Ubang m&gtilde;a pagtigayon co maoy nagapaanhi canaco
<row><cell lang=en>When will you leave the town?                   <cell>Anosa ca muhalin sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>Next week                                       <cell>Oña sa usang semana
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going to?                         <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to Cebu                              <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>Are you going home?                             <cell>Mupauli ca ba sa iño?
<row><cell lang=en>I will go very soon to Iloilo                   <cell>Dili madugay muadto aco sa Iloilo
<row><cell lang=en>When will you call at my house?                 <cell>Anosa muhapit ca sa amo?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot tell you                               <cell>Dili arang cong pagpahibalo canimo
<row><cell lang=en>When will you go there?                         <cell>Anosa ca muadto didto?
<row><cell lang=en>I will wait <corr sic="you for">for you</corr> to-morrow                <cell>Hulaton co icao ugma
<row><cell lang=en>I have many business to do                      <cell>Daghan ang m&gtilde;a buhat co
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot go                                     <cell>Dili co mahimong pagadto
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot go to you to-morrow                    <cell>Dili macahimo aco muadto sa iño ugma
<row><cell lang=en>I will call at you the day after to-morrow      <cell>Hapiton co icao ugma damlag
<row><cell lang=en>When will you come and dine with us?            <cell>Anosa maniodto ca sa amo?
<row><cell lang=en>I will go one day or other                      <cell>Oña na sa laing adlao
<row><cell lang=en>We shall be very happy to see you               <cell>Malipay came ug daco sa pagquita canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Good by                                         <cell>Ari na aco
</table>


<pb n=237 id=pb237>
<div1 id=s73>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa Religión.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What religion do you profess?                   <cell>Onsa ba ang religión mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I profess the catholic religion                 <cell>Sacop man aco sa religión n&gtilde;a católica
<row><cell lang=en>I am a jew                                      <cell>Judios man aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am a protestant                               <cell>Protestante man aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am a catholic                                 <cell>Católico man aco
<row><cell lang=en>What is the religion of your wife?              <cell>Onsa ba ang religión sa imong asaua?
<row><cell lang=en>She is a schismatic                             <cell>Cismática man sia
<row><cell lang=en>What religion does your father profess?         <cell>Onsa ba ang religión n&gtilde;a guinsacopan sa imong amahan?
<row><cell lang=en>He is a Roman Catholic                          <cell>Sacop man sia sa Iglesia Romana <!-- Unreadable -->
<row><cell lang=en>I want to confess                               <cell>Mucompisal aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to take the communion                    <cell>Buut aco macalauat
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to confess in Bisaya?               <cell>Buut ca ba mucompisal sa binisaya?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I wish                                     <cell>Oo<corr>, buut aco</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to confess in English?              <cell>Buut ca ba mucompisal sa iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish, but it is said that there is no priest who understands it       <cell>Buut aco unta, apan uala conoy Pare n&gtilde;a macasabut sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>I will confess in Spanish for there is an Augustinian father            <cell>Buut aco unta mucompisal sa quinachila cay dunay usa ca Pareng Agustinos dinhi
<pb n=238 id=pb238><row><cell lang=en>Do you confess every year?                      <cell>Macatuman ca ba sa pagcompisal sa tuig tuig?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do if I can                              <cell>Oo, cun ualay cabilinggan
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock is the mass?                    <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas imisa?
<row><cell lang=en>You can hear the low mass at five o&apos;clock       <cell>Mahimo ca sumingba n&gtilde;a rezada sa a las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>The high mass is at eight o&apos;clock               <cell>Ang mayor mao sa a las ocho
<row><cell lang=en>What alms must one give in Cebu for a mass?     <cell>Pilay limos sa usa ca misa sa Sugbu?
<row><cell lang=en>You can give what you please                    <cell>Icao lang magabuut mulimos sa imong higug maon
<row><cell lang=en>And for a requiem mass is there no alms ordered?        <cell>Uala bay sugo sa tun&gtilde;ud sa paglimos sa usa ca misa sa minatay?
<row><cell lang=en>I have never inquired after it                  <cell>Uala aco cutub magsusi niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know the Bishop?                         <cell>Naila mo ba ang Sr. Obispo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have seen him very often                 <cell>Oo, naquita co sia sa masubsub
<row><cell lang=en>Are there many churches in Cebu?                <cell>Duna bay daghang m&gtilde;a singbahan sa Sugbu?
<row><cell lang=en>There are several                               <cell>Duna man ug pipila ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>I like very much to see the Holy Child          <cell>Buut aco unta muquita sa Santo Niño
<pb n=239 id=pb239><row><cell lang=en>It is a very celebrated image                   <cell>Maoy usa ca larauan n&gtilde;a bantugan caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know its history?                        <cell>Nahibalo ca ba sa historia nia?
<row><cell lang=en>I have read that it was found by a soldier of expedition of Legazpi in the house of a native, but it is said it was left here when the Spaniards arrived at these Islands under the command of Magallanes
        <cell>Guibasa co n&gtilde;a sa paganhi ni <corr sic=Lepazpi>Legazpi</corr> ang usa ca soldado nia nacacaplag nianang larauan sa balay sa usa ca sugbuanon, apan guiin&gtilde;on man n&gtilde;a da-an guibia-an sia dinhi cun ang m&gtilde;a cachila miabut niining m&gtilde;a polo sa ubus sa gahum ni Magallanes
<row><cell lang=en>Can a requiem mass be celebrated by you in this church for the soul of my husband?              <cell>Mahimo mong pagmisa niining singbahan tun&gtilde;ud sa calag sa acong bana?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I can                                      <cell>Oo, mahimo man
<row><cell lang=en>When will the mass be <corr sic=celebrared>celebrated</corr>?           <cell>Anosa imisa?
<row><cell lang=en>You can hear the mass to-morrow                 <cell>Sumingba ca ugma
<row><cell lang=en>Can you celebrate another mass to Saint Joseph also?            <cell>Mahimo mong pagpahanun&gtilde;ud usab ug laing misa can S. José?
<row><cell lang=en>Why not? I can                                  <cell>Mano dili? Mahimo man
<row><cell lang=en>I should like to offer a candle to the Holy Child               <cell>Ihalad co unta ug usa ca candila sa Santo Niño
<pb n=240 id=pb240><row><cell lang=en>For whom are you praying?                       <cell>Quinsay guipan&gtilde;adye-an mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I am praying for the soul of my mother          <cell>Ang calag sa acong inahan maoy guipan&gtilde;adye-an co
</table>



<div1 id=s74>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa balay.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where is Miss Clara?                            <cell>Hain ba si Srta. Clara?
<row><cell lang=en>She is at home                                  <cell>Atua sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>She is out                                      <cell>Uala sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>She is up stairs                                <cell>Tua sa ita-as
<row><cell lang=en>She is down stairs                              <cell>Tua sa ubus
<row><cell lang=en>She is in his room                              <cell>Tua sa iyang cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Go into his room                                <cell>Musulud ca sa iyang cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Go in the parlor                                <cell>Musulud ca sa salas
<row><cell lang=en>Sit down and wait a while                       <cell>Mulingcod ca usa ug hulata madiot
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to return for it is late             <cell>Pauli aco usa cay hapon na man
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                                       <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Who is there?                                   <cell>Quinsa ba diha?
<row><cell lang=en>Who is knocking at the door?                    <cell>Quinsay nagatoctoc sa pulta?
<row><cell lang=en>Who is ringing?                                 <cell>Quinsay nagatauag?
<row><cell lang=en>Mr. John and his lady                           <cell>Si D. Juan ug ang iyang asaua
<row><cell lang=en>Mr. Lopez and his friends                       <cell>Sila si Sr. López
<pb n=241 id=pb241><row><cell lang=en>Introduce them in the sitting-room              <cell>Pasudla sila sa descanso
<row><cell lang=en>Tell them to sit down                           <cell>Palingcoda sila
<row><cell lang=en>Tell them to go into the parlor                 <cell>Pasudla sila sa salas
<row><cell lang=en>Tell them to wait a while                       <cell>Pahulata sila macadiot
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, how do you do?                    <cell>Maayong buntag, comusta camo?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, thank you                            <cell>Maayo man, diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am very glad to see you                       <cell>Nalipay aco caayo sa pagquita caniño
<row><cell lang=en>Your house is very beautiful                    <cell>Maanindut caayo ang balay mo
<row><cell lang=en>No, it is not so beautiful                      <cell>Dili, dili man sia maanindut caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Where does your sister live?                    <cell>Hain nagapuyo ang igso-on mo?
<row><cell lang=en>She lives in Parian-street                      <cell>Nagapuyo sa dalan sa Parian
<row><cell lang=en>She lives in a very good house                  <cell>Nagapuyo sia sa usa ca balay n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Whose house is that?                            <cell>Cansa ba canang balay?
<row><cell lang=en>It belongs to a merchant who has his stores on the Rizal square         <cell>Sa usa ca magbabaliguia n&gtilde;a aduna iang m&gtilde;a almacén sa Plaza Rizal
<row><cell lang=en>What must you have to buy that house?           <cell>Pila iquinahanglan mo sa pagpalit nianang balay?
<pb n=242 id=pb242><row><cell lang=en>I must have three thousand pesos                <cell>Quinahanglan co ug totolo ca libo ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>When do you begin to build your house?          <cell>Anosa musugod ca sa pagpatindug sa balay mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot work now for I have no timber          <cell>Dili mahimo cong pagpatrabajo caron cay uala acoy m&gtilde;a cahui
<row><cell lang=en>When do you gather the bricks?                  <cell>Anosa ca magtigom sa m&gtilde;a ladrillo?
<row><cell lang=en>On the next month                               <cell>Oña sa usang bulan
<row><cell lang=en>When will they do me the favor to clear my room?        <cell>Anosa magalimpio sila sa acong cuarto?
<row><cell lang=en>Very soon, for they are arranging your books    <cell>Di na madugay, cay nagpahamutang sila ug maayo sa imong m&gtilde;a libro
<row><cell lang=en>They are putting in order your things           <cell>Nanaghusay sila sa imong m&gtilde;a butang
<row><cell lang=en>They will do it right away                      <cell>Caron caron magabuhat sila niana
<row><cell lang=en>Where is your father?                           <cell>Hain ba ang imong tatay?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot tell you exactly                       <cell>Dili aco gayud mahibalo
<row><cell lang=en>He is out                                       <cell>Nanaog sia
<row><cell lang=en>He is at the door                               <cell>Atua sia sa pultahan
<row><cell lang=en>He is in his counting-house                    <cell>Atua sia sa iyang oficina
<row><cell lang=en>Are there any beggars?                          <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a paquilimos diha?
<pb n=243 id=pb243><row><cell lang=en>There are none                                  <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>There is one at the stairs                      <cell>Dunay usa ca booc sa hagdan
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to come again                          <cell>Pabalicon mo sia
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to come back                           <cell>Papaulion mo sia
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to walk into the kitchen               <cell>Pasudlon mo sia sa cocina
<row><cell lang=en>Where are the children?                         <cell>Hain ba ang m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>I think they are at their teacher&apos;s             <cell>Atua sila daguay sa balay sa ilang magtotoon
<row><cell lang=en>They went to school                             <cell>Minadto sila sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know when they will return home?         <cell>Nahibalo ca anosa mupauli sila sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know if they will be here at eleven o&apos;clock    <cell>Ambut cun mupauli ba sila sa a las once
<row><cell lang=en>Does the president intend to mend the school-houses?    <cell>Nagatuyo ba ang presidente sa pagayo sa m&gtilde;a escuelahan?
<row><cell lang=en>He does not                                     <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to speak to him?                    <cell>Buut ca ba magsulti cania?
<row><cell lang=en>I do                                            <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go to his house                          <cell>Tala na quila sa ila
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the president of the town?             <cell>Hain ba ang presidente sa longsod?
<row><cell lang=en>He is not at home; perhaps he is at town-house         <cell>Uala sia sa balay; tin&gtilde;ali atua sia sa tribunal
<pb n=244 id=pb244><row><cell lang=en>You are right; he is now at cock-fight          <cell>Dili matuod ang tubag mo; atua sia caron sa bulan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>When must I call again to find him at<corr> home</corr>?         <cell>Anosa bumalic aco caha sa paghiabut cania sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>At four o&apos;clock                                 <cell>Sa a las cuatro
<row><cell lang=en>I think you will find him at home               <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a maquita mo sia <corr>sa </corr>balay
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, I return home                        <cell>Maayo man, mupauli aco usa
<row><cell lang=en>Good by                                         <cell>Ari na aco
<row><cell lang=en>Come again                                      <cell>Balic balic
</table>


<div1 id=s75>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa singbahan.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you come from?                         <cell>Sa onsa ca? Diin ca guican?
<row><cell lang=en>I come from the church                          <cell>Guican aco sa singbahan
<row><cell lang=en>Did you see the church?                         <cell>Naquita mo ba ang singbahan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I did                                      <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you visited the church?                    <cell>Misulud ca ba sa singbahan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have heard the mass                      <cell>Oo, misingba aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do they celebrate high mass to-day?             <cell>Dunay misa mayor caron adlaua?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, and there will be a sermon also            <cell>Oo, ug dunay uali usab
<row><cell lang=en>I advise you to go                              <cell>Nagasambag aco canimo n&gtilde;a muadto ca unta
<pb n=245 id=pb245><row><cell lang=en>I am already preparing myself                   <cell>Nanagandam na man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Who will celebrate the mass?                    <cell>Quinsay magamisa?
<row><cell lang=en>The parish priest                               <cell>Ang cura
<row><cell lang=en>And who will be the preacher?                   <cell>Ug quinsay magauali?
<row><cell lang=en>An Augustinian father                           <cell>Usa ca Pare n&gtilde;a Agustinos
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock will the services begin?        <cell>Anosa musugud ang función?
<row><cell lang=en>At ten o&apos;clock                                  <cell>Sa a las diez
<row><cell lang=en>So, I have time to breakfast before           <cell>Busa duna acoy tiempo sa pagpainit
<row><cell lang=en>Have you heard the mass?                        <cell>Misingba ba icao?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, and I am glad of it                        <cell>Oo, ug nalipay aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>Why so?                                         <cell>N&gtilde;ano man?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I have seen the church inside, and it is very handsome          <cell>Cay naquita co ang singbahan sa sulud ug matahum man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>How many naves are there?                       <cell>Pila ang m&gtilde;a nave sa singbahan?
<row><cell lang=en>There is but one, and it is of a good height            <cell>Usa da man, apan igo n&gtilde;a hata-as
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the sacristy?                          <cell>Hain ba ang sacristía?
<row><cell lang=en>Behind the high altar                           <cell>Sa licod sa altar mayor
<row><cell lang=en>What do you say of the sermon?                  <cell>Onsay pulong mo sa tun&gtilde;ud sa uali?
<pb n=246 id=pb246><row><cell lang=en>I liked it very much; the preacher is a good one        <cell>Nahagugma aco caayo; maayo man ang palauali
<row><cell lang=en>The cantors made their task well?               <cell>Nanagcanta ba ug maayo ang m&gtilde;a cantor?
<row><cell lang=en>I found them very good                          <cell>Naquita co n&gtilde;a maayo sila
<row><cell lang=en>Were there many people?                         <cell>Daghanan ba ang m&gtilde;a tao?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, these catholics are very pious             <cell>Oo, quining m&gtilde;a católico mapuan&gtilde;urun man caayo
</table>



<div1 id=s76>
<head>Paquigpulong sa escuelahan.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Say the lesson                                  <cell>Ihatag mo ang lesión
<row><cell lang=en>I have not learned it                           <cell>Uala aco macatoon. Dili aco maalam
<row><cell lang=en>Why so?                                         <cell>N&gtilde;ano man?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I forget to learn it                    <cell>Cay hincalimtan co ang pagtoon niana
<row><cell lang=en>Because I have had many things to do            <cell>Cay daghan ang m&gtilde;a buhat co
<row><cell lang=en>Because I was very busy                         <cell>Cay daghan ang acong m&gtilde;a calin&gtilde;auan
<row><cell lang=en>Because my father is sick                       <cell>Cay masaquiton ang acong tatay
<row><cell lang=en>Because the lesson is very hard                 <cell>Cay maculi man caayo ang lesión
<row><cell lang=en>Because I had no time to learn it               <cell>Cay uala coy tiempo sa pagtoon
<pb n=247 id=pb247><row><cell lang=en>Because I could not learn it by heart           <cell>Cay uala aco macahimo sa pagsaolo
<row><cell lang=en>What is your lesson?                            <cell>Onsa ba ang lesión mo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is the tenth                                 <cell>Ang icapolo
<row><cell lang=en>What are you studying now?                      <cell>Onsa ba ang guitonan mo caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I am studying the English grammar               <cell>Guitonan co ang gramática inglesa
<row><cell lang=en>Can you say now your lesson?                    <cell>Mahimo mong paghatag na sa lesión?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot say it yet                             <cell>Dili pa mahimo. Di pa maalam aco
<row><cell lang=en>You will be kept in                             <cell>Dili ca papaulion sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>You are very careless                           <cell>Dili man icao macuguihon
<row><cell lang=en>I am at the head of the class                   <cell>Ania man aco sa nahaunang lugar sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Never mind, you have not learned your lesson to-day             <cell>Ualay sapayan, uala ca magasaolo sa lesion caron adlao
<row><cell lang=en>I am not deserved of that punishment            <cell>Dili aco tacus nianang castigo
<row><cell lang=en>The idle boys shall be always punished          <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a bata n&gtilde;a tapolan castigohon guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>Go and sit down in your place                   <cell>Musibug ca sa imong lingcoranan
<row><cell lang=en>There is no room                                <cell>Ualay lugar
<row><cell lang=en>Sit by me                                       <cell>Mulingcod ca sa luyo co
<row><cell lang=en>Have you done your exercise?                    <cell>Nagasulat ca ba sa imong tema?
<pb n=248 id=pb248><row><cell lang=en>Not yet                                         <cell>Uala pa
<row><cell lang=en>Go to the black-board                           <cell>Mugoa ca sa encerado
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot walk                                   <cell>Dili aco macalacao
<row><cell lang=en>Why? stand and obey me                          <cell>N&gtilde;ano? tumindog ca ug musugot canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Write your exercise                             <cell>Isulat mo ang tema
<row><cell lang=en>There is no room                                <cell>Ualay lugar
<row><cell lang=en>Rub that out                                    <cell>Panasa cana
<row><cell lang=en>Go and get some chalk                           <cell>Man&gtilde;ita ca ug tisa
<row><cell lang=en>Is it right?                                    <cell>Maayo ba?
<row><cell lang=en>No, you have made many mistakes                 <cell>Dili, daghan ang m&gtilde;a sayop mo
<row><cell lang=en>It is right                                     <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>All right                                       <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>It is wrong                                     <cell>Dili maayo cana
<row><cell lang=en>Peter will take you down                        <cell>Si Pedro magauna canimo
<row><cell lang=en>May I go on?                                    <cell>Mahimo cong pagpadayon?
<row><cell lang=en>No, that will do                                <cell>Dili, igo na
<row><cell lang=en>Look over your lesson again                     <cell>Magsaolo ca pagusab sa lesión
<row><cell lang=en>The class is over                               <cell>Tapus na ang pagescuela
<row><cell lang=en>Not yet                                         <cell>Dili da
<row><cell lang=en>There is something to translate into English            <cell>Duna pay ihulubad niño sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>Translate word for word                         <cell>Tagsa tagsaon ang paghubad mo sa m&gtilde;a pulong
<row><cell lang=en>It makes no sense at all                        <cell>Dili gayud masabut cana
<pb n=249 id=pb249><row><cell lang=en>Read your piece                                 <cell>Basaha ang imong bahin
<row><cell lang=en>May I go home?                                  <cell>Mahimo cong pagpauli na sa amo?
<row><cell lang=en>You may                                         <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Let me read this book                           <cell>Pabasaha aco niining libro
<row><cell lang=en>Which book is that?                             <cell>Onsa ba canang libroha?
<row><cell lang=en>It is an English Reader                         <cell>Usa ca basahon n&gtilde;a iningles
<row><cell lang=en>Will you read some pages?                       <cell>Buut ca ba magbasa ug pila ca dahon?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot, for it is very difficult              <cell>Dili aco macahimo, cay maculi man gayud
<row><cell lang=en>Try to read                                     <cell>Sulaya
<row><cell lang=en>Do I read fast enough?                          <cell>Casaran&gtilde;an ba ang pagcabasa co?
<row><cell lang=en>Quite so fast                                   <cell>Igo n&gtilde;a madali. Casaran&gtilde;an man
<row><cell lang=en>What mistakes did I make?                       <cell>Onsay m&gtilde;a sayop co?
<row><cell lang=en>Point them out to me                            <cell>Todloi aco sa m&gtilde;a sayop
<row><cell lang=en>You pronounce English badly                     <cell>Dili ca macaloas ug maayo sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>You speak English well                          <cell>Icao nagasangpot ug maayo sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>You speak English badly                         <cell>Icao nagasalicoaot sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>You read very well indeed                       <cell>Sa pagcamatuod, icao nagabasa ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I think English is very difficult               <cell>Guihuna huna co n&gtilde;a maculi caayo ang iningles
<pb n=250 id=pb250><row><cell lang=en>I think so, but if you use to read it every day you will find it very easy at last      <cell>Mao man, apan cun magbatasan ca unta sa pagbasa sa adlao adlao maquita mo n&gtilde;a masayon man oña
</table>



<div1 id=s77>
<head>Paquigpulong sa usa ca ciudad.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Here we are in Cebu                             <cell>Ania man quita sa Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>Am I already in the city?                       <cell>Ania man aco sa ciudad?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, you are                                    <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Tell me in what street there is a catholic church               <cell>Pahibaloa aco sa onsang dalana na-a usa ca singbahan n&gtilde;a católica
<row><cell lang=en>There are many, what do you wish to visit?      <cell>Duna man ug daghan, onsang singbahan buut mong pagduao?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not prefer any one                         <cell>Dili aco magapili pili
<row><cell lang=en>Well, if you go on this street you can see the cathedral        <cell>Maayo, cun magapadayon ca unta niining dalan maquita mo ang catedral
<row><cell lang=en>Can you tell me where the Augustinian Convent is situated?      <cell>Nahibalo ca cun hain ba ang Convento sa m&gtilde;a Agustinos?
<row><cell lang=en>It is on Rizal-square                           <cell>Tua sa plaza Rizal
<row><cell lang=en>And where is the Bishop palace?                 <cell>Ug hain ba ang palacio sa Sr. Obispo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is in front of the cathedral                 <cell>Atbang sa catedral
<pb n=251 id=pb251><row><cell lang=en>What street is this?                            <cell>Onsa ba quining dalana?
<row><cell lang=en>It is Infanta-street                            <cell>Quini mao ang dalan Infanta
<row><cell lang=en>There are a great many of shops                 <cell>Daghan caayo ang m&gtilde;a tienda
<row><cell lang=en>Is this street very long?                       <cell>Hata-as ba caayo quining dalana?
<row><cell lang=en>Not very long                                   <cell>Dili hata-as caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I like it very much                             <cell>Nahagugma aco caayo niini
<row><cell lang=en>Does the street begin here?                     <cell>Mao ba quini ang sinugdan sa dalan?
<row><cell lang=en>It begins on Rizal-square                       <cell>Misugod sa plaza Rizal
<row><cell lang=en>And where is the end?                           <cell>Ug hain ba ang catapusan?
<row><cell lang=en>It ends in Fagina bridge                        <cell>Sa puente sa Fagina
<row><cell lang=en>On which side of the bridge is San Nicolás?     <cell>Hain ba dapit sa taytayan ang San Nicolás?
<row><cell lang=en>It is on South side                             <cell>Tua dapit sa habagat
<row><cell lang=en>Has the city a good harbor?                     <cell>Duna bay maayong dungoanan sa ciudad?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it has a good one                          <cell>Oo, duna man ug usa n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Do many ships arrive there?                     <cell>Daghan ba ang m&gtilde;a sacayan ang nagadungo diha?
<row><cell lang=en>Not so many because the port of Manila is the first in the Islands      <cell>Dili daghan caayo cay ang puerto sa Manila maoy nahauna sa Filipinas
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the Custom-house?                     <cell>Hain ba ang Aduana?
<pb n=252 id=pb252><row><cell lang=en>It is on the sea-shore                          <cell>Tua sa baybayon
<row><cell lang=en>Please tell me where the Spanish Consulate is           <cell>Todloi aco cun hain man dapit ang Consulado Español
<row><cell lang=en>It is far from here                             <cell>Halayo man cutub dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>You must take a cab                             <cell>Magcarruage icao unta
<row><cell lang=en>Where is there a cab-stand?                    <cell>Hain ba dapit ang m&gtilde;a carruage n&gtilde;a igalabang?
<row><cell lang=en>It is near                                      <cell>Dool man
<row><cell lang=en>I want to see the Consul                        <cell>Quinahanglan co ang pagquita sa Cónsul
<row><cell lang=en>Where does he live?                             <cell>Hain nagapuyo sia?
<row><cell lang=en>He lives in Tinago                              <cell>Didto sa Tinago
<row><cell lang=en>Please tell me if I am going right for Recoleto Convent         <cell>Todloi aco unta cun maayo ba ang paglacat co pain&gtilde;on sa Convento sa m&gtilde;a Recoletos
<row><cell lang=en>Tell me which way I must go to reach the Quarter-master         <cell>Pahibaloa aco cun onsang dalana pagaguian co sa pagabut sa Quarter-master
<row><cell lang=en>Go on the right                                 <cell>Padayon ca dapit sa too
<row><cell lang=en>Go on the left                                  <cell>Padayon ca dapit sa uala
<row><cell lang=en>It is on the second square on the left hand side        <cell>Atua sa icaduhang plaza dapit sa uala
<row><cell lang=en>What is the name of this street?                <cell>Onsa ba ang n&gtilde;alan niining dalan?
<row><cell lang=en>Its name is Lutaos                              <cell>Lutaos
<row><cell lang=en>This street is very crowded                     <cell>Daghanan caayo ang m&gtilde;a tao niining dalan
<pb n=253 id=pb253><row><cell lang=en>Is there any walking?                           <cell>Duna bay sodoy sodoyan?
<row><cell lang=en>There is none, but you can walk along the sea-shore     <cell>Uala, apan mahimo ca magsodoy sodoy sa bactason
</table>



<div1 id=s78>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa vacaciones.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have holidays this year?               <cell>Magavacaciones ca caron tuiga?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I intend to go home                        <cell>Oo, naghuna huna aco muadto sa amo
<row><cell lang=en>When will you go out?                           <cell>Anosa ca muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>When my task shall be over                      <cell>Cun mahuman na ang m&gtilde;a lesion
<row><cell lang=en>Are you studying now?                           <cell>Nagaestudio ca ba caron?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I shall be <corr sic=examinated>examined</corr> very soon            <cell>Oo, dili madugay examinahon aco
<row><cell lang=en>When will you return to the city?               <cell>Anosa bumalic ca sa ciudad?
<row><cell lang=en>I will be back in a few days                    <cell>Bumalic aco oña na sa pila da ca adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Do you intend to take sea-baths?                <cell>Nagatuyo ca ba sa pagcaligo sa dagat?
<row><cell lang=en>I will see my physician about it                <cell>Paquisambag pa aco usa sa mananambal
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of fishing?                        <cell>Nahagugma ca ba sa pagpanagat?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but I prefer walking                       <cell>Oo, apan guipalabi co ang pagsodoy sodoy
<pb n=254 id=pb254><row><cell lang=en>Will it be very expensive to go to Manila?      <cell>Mahal ba caiha ang hinacay sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>No, Sir, if you are not very extravagant        <cell>Dili, Señor, cun dili ca ogaling buut magusic sa imong salapi
<row><cell lang=en>My town is a very delicious place               <cell>Ang acong longsod malilipayon caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am going there myself                         <cell>Muadto aco usab didto
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you wish to go?                          <cell>Mano magatin&gtilde;uha ca muadto?
<row><cell lang=en>Because it is a watering-place, and I <corr sic=will>want to</corr> go on account of my health           <cell>Cay dunay m&gtilde;a caligoan didto, ug buut aco muadto tun&gtilde;ud sa caayo sa acong lauas
<row><cell lang=en>How long are you going to stay here?            <cell>Magmadugay ca ba sa pagpuyo dinhi?
<row><cell lang=en>I intend to pass the whole holidays             <cell>Naghuna huna aco sa pagvacaciones
<row><cell lang=en>We shall row on the sea                         <cell>Magalin&gtilde;ao lin&gtilde;ao came sa <corr sic="paggay ong">paggayong</corr> didto sa dagat
<row><cell lang=en>We shall walk every evening                     <cell>Magasodoy sodoy came sa hapon hapon
<row><cell lang=en>We shall eat fish every day                     <cell>Mucaon came ug isda sa adlao adlao
<row><cell lang=en>We shall go to the theatre every evening        <cell>Muadto came sa teatro sa gabi-ing tanan
<row><cell lang=en>We shall go to Naga also                        <cell>Muadto came usab sa Naga
<row><cell lang=en>It is a place worthy of visiting                <cell>Tacus n&gtilde;a pagaquitaon canang longsod
<pb n=255 id=pb255><row><cell lang=en>When do you intend to depart?                   <cell>Anosa naghuna huna ca muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>To-morrow morning                               <cell>Ugma sa buntag
</table>



<div1 id=s79>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagsodoy sodoy.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good evening, how are you?                      <cell>Maayong hapon, comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, I am very glad to see you so soon<corr sic="?"></corr>       <cell>Maayo man, nalipay aco sa pagquita canimo sa in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a masayo
<row><cell lang=en>Why?                                            <cell>N&gtilde;ano?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I intend to take a walk, <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> accompany me?         <cell>Cay may tuyo co sa pagsodoy sodoy, buut ca ba muuban canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>I am at your service                            <cell>Icao ang magabuut
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks, perhaps <corr sic=May>Mary</corr> will be pleasant of coming with us       <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo, tin&gtilde;ali si María mahagugma muuban canatu
<row><cell lang=en>I am glad of it; and the children shall remain at home?         <cell>Nalipay aco niana; ug ang m&gtilde;a bata mapabilin ba sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know; wait a while for I am going to dress myself      <cell>Ambut; hulata aco macadiot cay magailis aco
<row><cell lang=en>With the greatest pleasure                      <cell>Tumanon co sa hingpit ang pagbuut mo. Sa labing maayong cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>While I go in my room sit and you may read this book            <cell>Sa diha pa aco sa sulud, mulingcod ca usa ug basaha quining libro
<pb n=256 id=pb256><row><cell lang=en>That is a good entertainment                    <cell>Mao cana ang usa ca calilin&gtilde;auan n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am ready to go out                            <cell>Naandam na aco sa pagcanaog
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go, have you forgotten anything?         <cell>Tala na, dunay hincalimtan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps my handkerchief was left on the bureau          <cell>Ang acong paño caiha hincalimtan sa cómoda
<row><cell lang=en>Send the waiter to take it                      <cell>Ipacoha mo sa bata
<row><cell lang=en>Boy, bring me the handkerchief I left on the bureau             <cell>Bata, iari ang paño n&gtilde;a guibilin co sa cómoda
<row><cell lang=en>It is not there                                 <cell>Uala man diha
<row><cell lang=en>It is, I am sure                                <cell>Na-a man, uala coy duha duha
<row><cell lang=en>No, I have not found it                         <cell>Uala, uala aco macacaplag
<row><cell lang=en>Look for it                                     <cell>Man&gtilde;ita
<row><cell lang=en>Here it is, it was into the drawer              <cell>Ania man, diha sia sa sulud sa cajón
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want</corr> anything else?                         <cell>Buut mo ug lain pa n&gtilde;a butang?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I have cigars enough                        <cell>Dili, duna acoy m&gtilde;a tabaco n&gtilde;a igo
<row><cell lang=en>Please take this umbrella                       <cell>Dada unta quining payong
<row><cell lang=en>I think it will not rain                        <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a dili magaolan
<pb n=257 id=pb257><row><cell lang=en>Well, let us begin our walk                     <cell>Maayo, magsodoy sodoy na quita
<row><cell lang=en>Which street <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> go?                       <cell>Onsang dalana buut mong pagagui?
<row><cell lang=en>If you please, let us go along the sea-shore    <cell>Cun dao mahagugma ca magabay bay quita sa bactason
<row><cell lang=en>It is very muddy; we shall go Parian-street     <cell>Nalapoc caayo diha; muagui quita unta sa dalan sa Parian
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will not">do not want</corr> because it is very dusty; we can go this way         <cell>Dili aco buut, cay naagbon caayo diha; padayon quita niining dalana
<row><cell lang=en>I am at your service; how far <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> walk?    <cell>Icao magabuut; asa cutub buut mong pagsodoy sodoy?
<row><cell lang=en>As far as the fountain; go on under the trees for they give a cool shadow       <cell>Cutub sa tubud; padayon ca manilong sa m&gtilde;a cahui cay nagalandung sa usa ca landung n&gtilde;a mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Let us call at this coffee-house                <cell>Atung hapiton quining buhatan ug café
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                                       <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Excuse me, I have to call at this church in order to pray for us        <cell>Tabe, dunay acong hapiton niining singbahan cay aron sa pagampo tun&gtilde;ud canatu
<row><cell lang=en>You are very pious                              <cell>Mapuan&gtilde;urun man icao caayo
<pb n=258 id=pb258><row><cell lang=en>Ay no, I am a sinner                            <cell>Ay dili, macasasala man aco
<row><cell lang=en>God will reward your good action                <cell>Baslan ca sa Dios tun&gtilde;ud sa buhat mo n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>What a pretty flower! look at it                <cell>Pagcanindut niining bulac! tanaua
<row><cell lang=en>I am looking at, but there are many of them on the other side, <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> cross the way?          <cell>Nagasulung na aco, apan sa luyo dunay daghan, buut ca mutapon didto?
<row><cell lang=en>Let us cross; you are right in telling that there are many here         <cell>Tala na; may hinungdan ca sa pagin&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a daghanan man dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>It is long since I saw them                     <cell>Dugay na n&gtilde;a naquita co sila
<row><cell lang=en>It seems to me that the walking is wet          <cell>Mabasa man daguay ang yota
<row><cell lang=en>No, that is the color of the ground, <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> be seated on that bench?          <cell>Dili, mao man ang color sa yuta, buut ca ba mulingcod nianang banco?
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will not">do not want to</corr>, because there is a pool             <cell>Dili, cay diha ana-a man ang usa ca danao
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps you are mistaken, there is no pool here         <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali nasayop ca cay ualay danao dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>Are you sure?                                   <cell>Matuod ba ang guiin&gtilde;on mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am                                       <cell>Oo
<pb n=259 id=pb259><row><cell lang=en>So, let us go and sit down                      <cell>Busa, tala na ug mulingcod quita
<row><cell lang=en>I am seeing now that this is a good place       <cell>Naquita co caron n&gtilde;a maayo quining lugara
<row><cell lang=en>I think so, therefore I was wrong in telling you that there was a pool here     <cell>Mao man lagui, busa uala acoy hinungdan sa pagin&gtilde;on canimo n&gtilde;a dinhi man ug usa ca danao
<row><cell lang=en>I thank you for your kindness; you know very well that my will is yours         <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa imong calooy; nasayod ca man n&gtilde;a naandam aco guihapon sa pagtuman sa imong m&gtilde;a sugo
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks                                     <cell>Diosmagbayad
<row><cell lang=en>I am tired and wish to rest for a short while           <cell>Nacapuy man aco ug nanin&gtilde;uha sa pagpahamudlay sa macadiot
<row><cell lang=en>What is that noise?                             <cell>Onsa ba canang banha?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you not hear it?                             <cell>Dili ca macadun&gtilde;ug?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is the noise of the carriages           <cell>Oo, mao ang banha sa m&gtilde;a carruage
<row><cell lang=en>I saw them formerly                             <cell>Da-an naquita co sila
<row><cell lang=en>Look at the trees, this is a <hi lang=ceb>talisay</hi>, that one a <hi lang=ceb>dipolo</hi> and this other a <hi lang=ceb>dapdap</hi>              <cell>Tanaua ang m&gtilde;a cahui, quini guihin&gtilde;anlan talisay, cadto dipolo ug cari dapdap
<row><cell lang=en>I like very much to know the names of the trees growing in the Philippines      <cell>Buut aco caayo macaila sa m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan sa m&gtilde;a cahui n&gtilde;a ania dinhi sa Filipinas
<pb n=260 id=pb260><row><cell lang=en>I do not know how you call these trees in English       <cell>Uala co hibaloi ang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan niining m&gtilde;a cahui sa iningles
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps they are unknown in England for I never saw them there          <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali dili cailhan sila sa Inglaterra cay uala nacu cutub maquita sila didto
<row><cell lang=en>The sun is setting, <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> return home?               <cell>Nagasalup na ang adlao, buut ca ba mupauli na sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is late and it is far from here to home         <cell>Oo, hapon na man ug halayo ang balay
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps we shall want a lantern                 <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali magaquinahanglan quita sa usa ca iuag
<row><cell lang=en>I know the way very well; do not fear for there are many lights in the streets also     <cell>Nahibalo aco ug maayo sa dalan; ayao ca cahadluc cay dunay usab ug daghang m&gtilde;a suga sa m&gtilde;a cadalanan
<row><cell lang=en>Well, go on first; I do not like to walk in such a darkness          <cell>Maayo man, muona ca; dili aco mahagugma mulacao cun man&gtilde;itn&gtilde;it na in&gtilde;on niaron
<row><cell lang=en>Here is your house                              <cell>Ania man ang balay mo
<row><cell lang=en>Go up                                           <cell>Hapit usa
<row><cell lang=en>I can not because my father is waiting for me, I am sure        <cell>Dili mahimo cay guihulat aco tinood sa acong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, go home, till to-morrow              <cell>Maayo man, mupauli ca, hasta sa ugma
<pb n=261 id=pb261><row><cell lang=en>Good night                                      <cell>Ari na aco
<row><cell lang=en>I hope you will sleep very well                 <cell>Milaom aco n&gtilde;a matolog ca ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I think so, for I am much fatigued              <cell>Mao man, cay nacapuy aco tuod
</table>


<div1 id=s80>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a cahuy, &amp;.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>When will you go to the farm?                   <cell>Anosa muadto ca sa hacienda?
<row><cell lang=en>I will go in a few days for the doctor advised me to leave the city     <cell>Muadto aco sa sulud sa pila ca adlao cay ang médico nagsambag canaco n&gtilde;a mubia aco unta sa ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to have a country life also              <cell>Aco buut man usab magpuyo sa gauas sa ciudad
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> accompany me?                          <cell>Buut ca ba muuban canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want to</corr>                                          <cell>Buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like agriculture?                        <cell>Nahagugma ca sa pagbaul?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I like it very much                        <cell>Oo, nahagugma caayo
<row><cell lang=en>So that, we can spend the days speaking about the trees, flowers, fruits and other useful things        <cell>Sa in&gtilde;on niana, muagui quita sa m&gtilde;a adlao sa pagsulti sa tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a cahuy, sa m&gtilde;a bulac, m&gtilde;a bon&gtilde;a ug uban pang m&gtilde;a butang n&gtilde;a mapulus
<pb n=262 id=pb262><row><cell lang=en>I think so                                      <cell>Mao man
<row><cell lang=en>All right; we must leave the city on next Saturday      <cell>Maayo man; oña sa Sábado muhalin quita sa ciudad
<row><cell lang=en>Who is the proprietor of this farm?     <cell>Quinsa ba ang tagya niining hacienda?
<row><cell lang=en>A friend of my father                   <cell>Usa ca abian sa acong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>Is it a fertile soil?                   <cell>Malabong ba quining yuta?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is                              <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Does it produce fruit-trees?            <cell>Mabuhi ba ang m&gtilde;a cahuy n&gtilde;a bon&gtilde;ahan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, you can see many kinds of them     <cell>Oo, arang ca macaquita sa m&gtilde;a cahuy n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain
<row><cell lang=en>There are the mango-trees, banana-trees and chico-trees         <cell>Dunay m&gtilde;a manga, m&gtilde;a saguing ug m&gtilde;a chico
<row><cell lang=en>What kind of trees are there in that wood?      <cell>Onsa ba ang m&gtilde;a cahuya n&gtilde;a na-a diha sa lasang?
<row><cell lang=en>You can see there the <foreign lang=ceb>molabe, ipil, balayon</foreign> and other trees     <cell>Mahimo mong pagquita diha sa molabe, ipil, balayon ug laing m&gtilde;a cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the sugar-plantation?          <cell>Hain ba ang catubhan?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not far from here                 <cell>Dili man halayo
<pb n=263 id=pb263><row><cell lang=en>The sugar-crop will be plentiful        <cell>Daco man caayo ang pagcaintos oña. Magdaco ang inani sa tubo
<row><cell lang=en>How many hogsheads of sugar does the farmer make?       <cell>Pila ca bayong n&gtilde;a azucar ang guiani sa hacendero?
<row><cell lang=en>I think about three thousands           <cell>Guihuna huna co n&gtilde;a tolo ca libo capin cun culang
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go to the maize-field            <cell>Tala na quita sa maisan
<row><cell lang=en>What a beautiful field!                 <cell>Pagcamatahum niining baul!
<row><cell lang=en>When will they harvest the maize?       <cell>Anosa magapopo sila sa maiz?
<row><cell lang=en>On next month                           <cell>Sa bulan n&gtilde;a umalabut
<row><cell lang=en>They get two crops of it, the first on August and they call it <hi>panuig</hi>, and the second called <hi>ulilan</hi>, on January or February           <cell>Duha ca inani guidan&gtilde;at nila, ang nahauna sa bulan sa Agosto, n&gtilde;a guihin&gtilde;anlan panuig, ug ang icaduha n&gtilde;a mao ang ulilan sa Enero cun sa Febrero ba
<row><cell lang=en>Do you see that rice-field?             <cell>Naquita mo ba canang humayan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do; what are they doing in it?           <cell>Oo; onsay guibuhat nila diha?
<row><cell lang=en>They are cutting the spikes             <cell>Nan&gtilde;otlo sila
<row><cell lang=en>Do they not mow the rice?               <cell>Dili sila managgalab sa humay?
<pb n=264 id=pb264><row><cell lang=en>They do not; they cut only the spikes as they do with maize: they take out the ears     <cell>Dili; man&gtilde;otlo lang sila in&gtilde;on sa guibuhat nila sa maiz: magapopo lang sa m&gtilde;a poso
<row><cell lang=en>Let us walk <corr sic=amonts>amongst</corr> these trees         <cell>Magsodoy sodoy quita sa taliuala niining m&gtilde;a cahuy
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, you can walk under this cocoa-plantation for it is warm      <cell>Maayo man, panilong ca niining calubihan cay mainit man
<row><cell lang=en>How do you call these trees?            <cell>Onsay n&gtilde;alan niining m&gtilde;a cahuy?
<row><cell lang=en>Cocoa-trees                             <cell>M&gtilde;a lubi
<row><cell lang=en>They are very useful for the natives, for they get cocoa-nuts and <hi>tuba</hi> from them       <cell>Quining m&gtilde;a cahuy himuslan caayo sa m&gtilde;a filipino cay guidan&gtilde;at nila guican canila ang m&gtilde;a lubi ug ang tuba
<row><cell lang=en>What are the cocoa-nuts good for?       <cell>Onsa ba ang capuslanan sa m&gtilde;a lubi?
<row><cell lang=en>They are good for making cocoanut-oil           <cell>Ang pulus nila mao cay guican canila ang lana sa lubi
<row><cell lang=en>What is the name of the cocoa-tree that produces <hi>tuba</hi>?         <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;alan sa lubi n&gtilde;a nagahatag ug tuba?
<row><cell lang=en>Its native name is <hi>sangutan</hi>            <cell>Ang n&gtilde;alan nia sa binisaya mao sangutan
<row><cell lang=en>There are many flowers; if you please, you can make up a bouquet for the misses         <cell>Dunay daghang man&gtilde;a bulac; ug maarang sa imong pagbuut, mahimo mong paggama ug usa ca pong-pong nila sa m&gtilde;a dalaga
<pb n=265 id=pb265><row><cell lang=en>There are also many buds                <cell>Dunay usab ug daghang m&gtilde;a labios
<row><cell lang=en>Which flowers do you prefer?            <cell>Onsa bay m&gtilde;a bulac ang palabihon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer the rose, lily and violet      <cell>Ang rosas, lirio ug ang violeta
<row><cell lang=en>The violet is the emblem of modesty     <cell>Ang violeta mao ang larauan sa pagcamaligdong
<row><cell lang=en>Are there any shade-trees?              <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a cahuy n&gtilde;a nagalandong?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, there are some <hi>dapdap</hi> and <hi>talisay</hi>        <cell>Oo, dunay m&gtilde;a dapdap ug m&gtilde;a talisay
<row><cell lang=en>How many times a day does the gardener water the flowers?       <cell>Sa macapila sa usa ca adlao boboan sa magbalantay sa tanaman ang m&gtilde;a bulac?
<row><cell lang=en>Twice a day                             <cell>Macaduha sa usa ca adlao
<row><cell lang=en>See that shady spot on the valley       <cell>Tanaon mo cadtong calibon&gtilde;an sa ualog
<row><cell lang=en>Near of that place there is a banana-plantation         <cell>Dool nianang lugara duna man ug usa ca saguin&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>I have heard that Manila-hemp is produced by a plantain-tree    <cell>Guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a ang lanot guican sa usa ca pono sa saguing
<pb n=266 id=pb266><row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is obtained from a banana-plant which grows in the Philippine Islands           <cell>Oo, ang abacá guican sa tugdan sa usa ca saguing n&gtilde;a mabuhi sa Filipinas
<row><cell lang=en>How do you call the Manila-hemp in Bisaya?      <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;alan sa abacá sa binisaya?
<row><cell><hi>Lanot</hi>                          <cell>Lanot
<row><cell lang=en>The hemp-plantation is called <hi lang=ceb>abacahan</hi> or <hi lang=ceb>abachan</hi>             <cell>Ang <corr sic="casagin&gtilde;an">casaguin&gtilde;an</corr> sa abacá guihin&gtilde;anlan abacahan cun abachan
<row><cell lang=en>For what is Manila-hemp used?           <cell>Onsay pulus sa lanot?
<row><cell lang=en>It is made into ropes or woven into clothes     <cell>Sa lanot mahimo ug m&gtilde;a pisi cun m&gtilde;a panapton
<row><cell lang=en>Why is it called Manila-hemp?           <cell>N&gtilde;ano ang lanot guihin&gtilde;anlan abacá sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>Because Manila is its principal market          <cell>Cay Manila mao ang nahaunang mercado nianang lanota
<row><cell lang=en>How many crops does it produce?         <cell>Pila ba ang m&gtilde;a inani sa abacá?
<row><cell lang=en>It is ever producing                    <cell>Canunay paani sia
<row><cell lang=en>Does the farmer grow millet?            <cell>Guipugas ba ug daua sa hacendero?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, there is a milletfield there       <cell>Oo, didto man ang usa ca dauahan
<row><cell lang=en>Is the seed good?                       <cell>Maayo ba ang binhi<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, a grain of millet produces several ears of corn            <cell>Oo, ang usa lugas n&gtilde;a daua mamon&gtilde;a ug pipila ca puso
<pb n=267 id=pb267><row><cell lang=en>Do they plough the soil?                <cell>Guidarohan ba ang baul?
<row><cell lang=en>No, for it is sandy                     <cell>Dili cay mabongbong man ang yuta
<row><cell lang=en>What is the extent of this ground?      <cell>Onsa ba ang cadaco niining baul?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                           <cell>Ambut
<row><cell lang=en>Let us return home, I am very hungry    <cell>Mupauli na quita sa balay, guigutum man aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>Do not forget to take the bouquet of flowers            <cell>Dili hicalimtan mo ang pagbitbit sa pongpong sa m&gtilde;a bulac
</table>



<div1 id=s81>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcaligo.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going?                    <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to take a bath               <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa pagcaligo
<row><cell lang=en>Where are the best baths?               <cell>Hain ba ang m&gtilde;a caligoan n&gtilde;a labing maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>In the sea-shore                        <cell>Sa bactason
<row><cell lang=en>Are they near here?                     <cell>Hadool ba sila dinhi?
<row><cell lang=en>They are not far from here              <cell>Dili man halayo cutub dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>Where are they?                         <cell>Hain ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>Near the Custom-house                   <cell>Dool sa Aduana
<row><cell lang=en>What is the price of each bath?         <cell>Tagpila ba ang tagsa ca pagcaligo?
<row><cell lang=en>One peso each                           <cell>Mamisos ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Do they give towels?                    <cell>Guihatag ba nila ug m&gtilde;a pamahiran?
<pb n=268 id=pb268><row><cell lang=en>Yes; you can find there three towels, a large one for the body, a smaller one for the face and another for the feet          <cell>Oo; taga-an ca totolo ca booc, ang usang daco sa pagpahid sa lauas, ang icaduha n&gtilde;a diotay pa sa naong ug ang icatolo sa m&gtilde;a ti-il
<row><cell lang=en>What perquisite must I give to the servant?             <cell>Pila ang ihatag co sa sologo-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Do not think of that for they will not receive anything         <cell>Ayao ca paghuna huna niana, cay dili sila dumauat ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Are all the baths occupied?             <cell>Duna bay tao sa n&gtilde;atanan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a caligoan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, you must wait a while              <cell>Oo, hulaton mo unta ug macadiot
<row><cell lang=en>I wish the bath to be cold              <cell>Buut aco maligo sa tubig n&gtilde;a mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Hot water                               <cell>Tubig n&gtilde;a mainit
<row><cell lang=en>Lukewarm water                          <cell>Tubig n&gtilde;a inadlao
<row><cell lang=en>Boiling water                           <cell>Tubig n&gtilde;a binucal
<row><cell lang=en>I want a bathing dress                  <cell>Quinahanglan co ug usa ca visti sa pagcaligo
<row><cell lang=en>Give me also a cake of soap             <cell>Taga-i aco usab ug usa ca pastilla n&gtilde;a sabon
<row><cell lang=en>I do not wish the bath very warm        <cell>Dili aco maligo sa tubig n&gtilde;a mainit caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I will call you when I wish to leave the bath           <cell>Taogon ta icao cun gumuloa na aco sa caligoan
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to dry myself                    <cell>Pahid-an co ug maayo ang acung lauas
<row><cell lang=en>Let me know when I have been ten minutes in the bath    <cell>Pahibaloa aco cun diha na aco sa caligoan napolo ca minuto
<pb n=269 id=pb269><row><cell lang=en>I wish to take a boiling bath           <cell>Buut aco maligo sa tubig n&gtilde;a binucal
<row><cell lang=en>I think you can not suffer it           <cell>Dili ca macaantos niana daguay
<row><cell lang=en>I wish the bath neither warm nor cold           <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a ang tubig dili mainit ni mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Clean the bath well                     <cell>Hugasi ug maayo ang caligoan
<row><cell lang=en>Is there a swimming bath in this Establishment?         <cell>Dunay caligoan n&gtilde;a daco n&gtilde;a pagalan&gtilde;oyan niining balay?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, there is one                       <cell>Oo, duna man ug usa ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>You can dive                            <cell>Mahimo ca pagsalom
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the bath-keeper?               <cell>Hain ba ang magbalantay sa caligoan?
<row><cell lang=en>He is now preparing the cold bath       <cell>Nagandam man sia caron sa caligoan n&gtilde;a mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>Call me when I have been in the bath for a while        <cell>Sangpita aco cun dugay dugay na aco sa caligoan
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to bathe in sea-water           <cell>Buut aco maligo sa tubig sa dagat
<row><cell lang=en>I intend to take nine baths             <cell>May tuyo co ang pagcaligo sa macasiam
<row><cell lang=en>I will come every Sunday to bathe myself        <cell>Muanhi aco sa pagcaligo sa dolodomingo
<pb n=270 id=pb270><row><cell lang=en>The baths make me good                  <cell>Ang pagcaligo macaayo canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Bathe this dog                          <cell>Ligoa quining iro
<row><cell lang=en>I will not because it makes him ill     <cell>Dili aco buut cay macadaot cania ang pagcaligo
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to take medicinal baths?    <cell>Buut ca ba maligo sa tubig n&gtilde;a matambal?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to speak to the doctor about it          <cell>Paquisambag aco usa sa médico
<row><cell lang=en>If you wish you can go to Mainit        <cell>Ug buut ca unta mahimo mong pagadto sa Mainit
<row><cell lang=en>Where is that watering-place?          <cell>Hain dapit canang m&gtilde;a caligoan?
<row><cell lang=en>It is near of Santander, a town of Cebu province        <cell>Dool sa Santander, usa ca longsod sa Provincia sa Sugbu
</table>


<div1 id=s82>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a quinahanglan sa tao.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are you hungry?                         <cell>Guigutum ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am very hungry                   <cell>Oo, guigutum aco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am dying with hunger                  <cell>Hapit mamatay aco sa gutum
<row><cell lang=en>I feel very hungry                      <cell>Guigutum aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>Are you thirsty?                        <cell>Nauhao ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I am not                                <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>I am very thirsty                       <cell>Nauhao aco caayo
<pb n=271 id=pb271><row><cell lang=en>I could drink with pleasure             <cell>Muinom aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>Give me something to drink              <cell>Tagai aco ug bisan onsang ilimnon
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a glass of water                <cell>Tagai aco ug tubig sa vaso
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you sit down?                    <cell>N&gtilde;ano milingcod ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I am very tired                 <cell>Cay nacapuy aco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>If you are tired you must prefer to go to bed           <cell>Cun nacapuy ca muadto ca unta sa higdaan
<row><cell lang=en>I am very much fatigued                 <cell>Guicapuyan aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>I am cold                               <cell>Guitugnao aco
<row><cell lang=en>My hands are cold                       <cell>Mabugnao man ang m&gtilde;a camot co
<row><cell lang=en>I am warm                               <cell>Mainit aco
<row><cell lang=en>I am very warm                          <cell>Nainitan aco tuod
<row><cell lang=en>I am sleepy                             <cell>Catologon aco
<row><cell lang=en>Go to sleep                             <cell>Muhigda ca
<row><cell lang=en>I think I shall sleep well              <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a macatolog aco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>I am overcome with sleep                <cell>Catologon aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>I wish I were in bed                    <cell>Mihigda na aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>You must go to bed very soon because your body is very cold             <cell>Muhigda ca sa labing madali cay nan&gtilde;amig ang imong lauas
</table>



<pb n=272 id=pb272>
<div1 id=s83>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a saquit.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you seen Alphonso?                 <cell>Naquita mo ba si Alfonso?
<row><cell lang=en>I often see him, almost every day       <cell>Naquita co sia sa masubsub, hapit sa m&gtilde;a adlaong tanan
<row><cell lang=en>Is he well now?                         <cell>Mapiscay ba sia caron?
<row><cell lang=en>He is not well                          <cell>Dili mapiscay caayo
<row><cell lang=en>How is your younger brother?            <cell>Comusta ang imong manghud?
<row><cell lang=en>He is still very sick                   <cell>Masaquiton pa sia caayo
<row><cell lang=en>What has been the matter with you to-day?               <cell>Onsay guibati mo caron adlaua?
<row><cell lang=en>Nothing                                 <cell>Uala
<row><cell lang=en>And what has been the matter with your sister?          <cell>Ug onsay guibati sa imong igso-on n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>She has been indisposed                 <cell>Masaquit saquit sia
<row><cell lang=en>How is your grandfather?                <cell>Comusta ang imong apohan?
<row><cell lang=en>He has been unwell for some days past; he is obliged to keep <corr>to </corr>his room            <cell>Tan tan na nagadaot sia, ug tun&gtilde;ud niana dili sia macagoa sa iyang cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>I hope it will be nothing               <cell>Basin n&gtilde;a diotay unta ang saquit nia
<row><cell lang=en>It is a mere trifle; but at his years it is necessary to be careful     <cell>Dili unta tagdon ang saquit nia, apan cay tigulang na man quinahanglan gayud n&gtilde;a magabantay sia
<pb n=273 id=pb273><row><cell lang=en>What is the matter with you?            <cell>Onsay saquit mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                           <cell>Ambut
<row><cell lang=en>What ails you?                          <cell>Onsay imong naol-ol?
<row><cell lang=en>The whole body ails me                  <cell>Naol-ol ang tibooc n&gtilde;a lauas
<row><cell lang=en>I am very fatigued                      <cell>Maluya caayo ang acong lauas
<row><cell lang=en>What has been the matter with your sister-in-law?       <cell>Onsay saquit sa imong bayao n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>She has been very tired                 <cell>Nacapuy sia ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is your mother well?                    <cell>Maayo ba ang inahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>She is sickly                           <cell>Salaquitan man sia
<row><cell lang=en>How is your daughter?                   <cell>Comusta ang imong anac n&gtilde;a babaye?
<row><cell lang=en>She is never well two days together and yet she takes every possible precaution         <cell>Dili sia mapiscay ug lauas duha ca adlao da n&gtilde;a nagasunud, bisan daco caayo ang pagbantay nia sa iyang caogalin&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>There are no people who lose their health sooner than those who take too much pain to preserve it       <cell>Ualay lain n&gtilde;a masaquit sa labing madali niadtong m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a nagabantay sa hinlabihan n&gtilde;a pagbantay sa ilang lauas
<pb n=274 id=pb274><row><cell lang=en>Perhaps you are right, but it is very difficult to find the golden mean         <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali may hinungdan ca, apan maculi caayo ang pagtoltol sa casaran&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>For that reason health is of all our possessions the most valuable and the worst cared of       <cell>Tun&gtilde;ud niana ang capiscay sa lauas bisan maoy usa ca caayohan sa m&gtilde;a labing hamili, sa masubsub maoy ang labing guiaydan ta
<row><cell lang=en>The medicine makes the sick recover     <cell>Ang tambal macaayo sa masaquiton
<row><cell lang=en>Of what illness did Peter die?          <cell>Onsay guicamatyan ni Pedro?
<row><cell lang=en>He died of fever                        <cell>Ang hilanat maoy guicamatyan nia
<row><cell lang=en>Why did your friend remain at home to-day?      <cell>N&gtilde;ano ang higala mo nagapuyo sa balay caron adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>Because he has headache               <cell>Cay masaquit sia ug olo
<row><cell lang=en>Can he not go out?                      <cell>Dili macanaog sia?
<row><cell lang=en>He cannot, because he has fever also    <cell>Dili macahimo sia cay guihilantan usab
<row><cell lang=en>Did he send for the doctor?             <cell>Guipacoha ba nia ang médico?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, he did                             <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>My brother is so sick that he cannot see you    <cell>In&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a daco ang saquit sa igso-on co n&gtilde;a dili arang sia macaquita canimo
<pb n=275 id=pb275><row><cell lang=en>What made him so sick?                  <cell>Onsay nacasaquit cania?
<row><cell lang=en>I think fruit made him ill              <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a ang bon&gtilde;a maoy nacadaot cania
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t eat too much fruit if you <corr sic="will not">do not want to</corr> be sick        <cell>Ayao ca pagcaon ug bon&gtilde;a sa hinlabihan ug dili ca buut magmasaquit
<row><cell lang=en>Where is your father?                   <cell>Hain ba ang imong amahan?
<row><cell lang=en>He is at home                           <cell>Tua sia sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Why does he not walk?                   <cell>Mano dili sia magasodoy sodoy?
<row><cell lang=en>Because he has not yet recovered        <cell>Cay apiogon pa sia
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, how long has the physician been waiting for me?         <cell>Bata, dugay na ba n&gtilde;a guihulat aco sa médico?
<row><cell lang=en>Not long, a few minutes                 <cell>Dili dugay, pila ca minuto da
<row><cell lang=en>You must go out very seldom, for I never have the pleasure of meeting you in the street         <cell>Talagsada nanaog ca daguay, cay uala pa co maquita icao sa dalan
<row><cell lang=en>I am very ill, so that I cannot go out          <cell>Masaquit aco ug daco, tun&gtilde;ud niana dili aco macanaog
<row><cell lang=en>I am very cold                          <cell>Nasip-on aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>I have been told your son is very sick, what is the matter with him?    <cell>Guisuguinlan aco n&gtilde;a masaquiton caayo ang anac mo, onsay saquit nia?
<pb n=276 id=pb276><row><cell lang=en>He went to walk the other day with some friends, and caught a severe cold       <cell>Sa usang adlao miadto sia sa pagsodoy sodoy uban sa pila ca isigcain&gtilde;on nia ug nasip-on sia ug daco
<row><cell lang=en>Will you be able to take care of that child?            <cell>Mahimo mong pagbantay nianang bata?
<row><cell lang=en>I will take care of it with the greatest pleasure       <cell>Bantayan co sia sa maayong cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>How does your teacher feel?             <cell>Comusta ang imong <corr sic="mag toto-on">magtoto-on</corr>?
<row><cell lang=en>He is so so now                         <cell>Arang arang man sia caron
<row><cell lang=en>He is unwell                            <cell>Nadaot sia
<row><cell lang=en>Is your neighbor in good health?        <cell>Maayo ba ang imong silin&gtilde;an?
<row><cell lang=en>He is now suffering from his stomach    <cell>Caron guisoolan sia sa coto coto
<row><cell lang=en>He is a little indisposed               <cell>Masaquit sia ug diotay
<row><cell lang=en>How is your family?                     <cell>Maayo ba ang imong panimalay?
<row><cell lang=en>They all are well except my brother     <cell>Maayo man silang tanan gauas sa acong igso-on n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>What is his illness?                    <cell>Onsa ba ang saquit nia?
<row><cell lang=en>He has sore fingers                     <cell>Masaquit sia sa m&gtilde;a todlo
<row><cell lang=en>I have heard your uncle is not well     <cell>Nadun&gtilde;ug co n&gtilde;a masaquit usab ang imong oyo-an
<pb n=277 id=pb277><row><cell lang=en>It is not true                          <cell>Dili matuod
<row><cell lang=en>He has got a sore throat                <cell>Masaquit sia sa totonlan
<row><cell lang=en>How long has he been ill?               <cell>Dugay na n&gtilde;a masaquit sia?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not long since                    <cell>Bag-o pa
<row><cell lang=en>And you, Sir, how do you feel?          <cell>Ug icao, Señor, comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>So so, but my daughter has a violent fever      <cell>Arang arang, apan ang acong anac n&gtilde;a babaye guihilantan ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Since when?                             <cell>Canosa cutub?
<row><cell lang=en>At midnight she was seized with it      <cell>Sa tun&gtilde;ang gabi-i minsugod sia sa pagbati niana
<row><cell lang=en>I wish her a speedy recovery            <cell>Nanin&gtilde;uha aco n&gtilde;a magmapiscay sia sa labing madali
<row><cell lang=en>She is much better than she was         <cell>Maayo ayo na sia caron
<row><cell lang=en>I hope she will get immediate ease from her illness     <cell>Milaom aco n&gtilde;a luason sia unta sa madali sa iyang saquit
<row><cell lang=en>How are you, Madam?                     <cell>Comusta icao, Señora?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not been well lately, but I feel better now      <cell>Bag-o pa masaquit aco, apan caron maayo ayo na
<row><cell lang=en>I hope to see you better soon           <cell>Nagalaom aco sa pagquita canimo n&gtilde;a mapiscay sa dili na madugay
<row><cell lang=en>Are you sick, mother?                   <cell>Masaquit ca ba, anan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am                               <cell>Oo
<pb n=278 id=pb278><row><cell lang=en>I am very sorry for it                  <cell>Nasubu aco caayo tun&gtilde;ud niana
<row><cell lang=en>I hope you are not seriously ill        <cell>Basin n&gtilde;a dili daco ang saquit mo
</table>



<div1 id=s84>
<head>Paquigpulong sa masaquiton ug sa mananambal.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have sent for you, doctor, because I feel very ill            <cell>Guipaanhi co icao, Doctor, cay masaquiton aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>What ails you?                          <cell>Onsay imong guibati?
<row><cell lang=en>My body is very weak                    <cell>Maluya caayo ang acong lauas
<row><cell lang=en>How did you rest last night?            <cell>Maayo ba ang pagcatolog mo caron gabi-i?
<row><cell lang=en>Very badly; I did not sleep a moment    <cell>Dautan caayo; uala aco matolog bisan usa ca pagpiloc da
<row><cell lang=en>Let me feel your pulse                  <cell>Pamisil ca
<row><cell lang=en>I had a fever the whole night           <cell>Guihilantan aco sa tibooc n&gtilde;a gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>I have had a terrible nightmare         <cell>Guialimon&gtilde;aoan aco ug daco
<row><cell lang=en>It would be better to die               <cell>Maayo pa ang pagcamatay
<row><cell lang=en>Show me your tongue                     <cell>Ipaquita canaco ang imong dila
<row><cell lang=en>My head aches me                        <cell>Masaquit ang acong olo
<row><cell lang=en>You want bleeding                       <cell>Quinahanglan ang pagcadlit canimo
<pb n=279 id=pb279><row><cell lang=en>Your tongue is foul                     <cell>Bulin&gtilde;on man ang imong dila
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any pain in your chest?        <cell>Masaquit ba ang imong dughan?
<row><cell lang=en>I have a pain in my throat              <cell>Masaquit ang acong totonlan
<row><cell lang=en>Sit up on the bed                       <cell>Mulingcod ca sa higdaan
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a pain in your side?           <cell>Guibati mo ba ug saquit sa imong quilid?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I have a pain in my waist           <cell>Dili, ang acong hauac hinoo maol-ol
<row><cell lang=en>I feel exceedingly weak                 <cell>Nalay lay caayo ang acong lauas
<row><cell lang=en>I can scarcely stand on my legs         <cell>Lugus macatindug aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you sleep <corr sic=soudly>soundly</corr>?           <cell>Nacatolog ca ba ug maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I dream a great deal                    <cell>Nagadamgo aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>How were you taken ill?                 <cell>Onsay guinicanan sa imong saquit?
<row><cell lang=en>I began by a shivering                  <cell>Nasip-on aco sa sinugdan
<row><cell lang=en>Do you think it dangerous?              <cell>Sa imong pagsabut malisud ba caha quini?
<row><cell lang=en>Do not believe that                     <cell>Ayao ca paghuna huna niana
<row><cell lang=en>I am very tired of being so long in bed         <cell>Nabalao aco na sa higdaan
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to die                       <cell>Mamatay aco
<row><cell lang=en>We don&apos;t know the value of health till we have lost it          <cell>Dili quita magpacamahal sa caayo sa atung lauas cun dili quita magmasaquit
<pb n=280 id=pb280><row><cell lang=en>Take care not to catch cold             <cell>Bantay ca n&gtilde;a dili ca baya masip-on
<row><cell lang=en>Must I take that potion?                <cell>Muinom aco caha nianang tambal?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but take it fasting                <cell>Oo, apan sa dili pa icao magpainit
<row><cell lang=en>How often must I take it?               <cell>Macapila muinom aco niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Three times a day                       <cell>Macatolo sa usa ca adlao
</table>



<div1 id=s85>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagduao.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, Madam                     <cell>Maayong buntag, Señora
<row><cell lang=en>Good day, Sir                           <cell>Maayong adlao, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Good afternoon, Miss                    <cell>Maayong palis, Señorita
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do?                          <cell>Comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, thank you very much          <cell>Maayo man, diosmagbayad canimo sa macadaghan
<row><cell lang=en>Be seated                               <cell>Mulingcod ca
<row><cell lang=en>Please to take a seat                   <cell>Mulingcod ca usa
<row><cell lang=en>Ah!, here is Mr. Michael, I am very glad to see you     <cell>Ah!, ania si Sr. Miguel, nalipay aco caayo sa pagquita canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Sir           <cell>Daco ang calipay co sa pagcaila canimo, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>I have the honor to salute you          <cell>Nalipay aco sa pagpan&gtilde;amosta canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Somebody knocks                         <cell>Dunay nagatoctoc
<pb n=281 id=pb281><row><cell lang=en>Can it be Mr. Nicholas?                 <cell>Mao ba caha si D. Nicolás?
<row><cell lang=en>Madam, I have the honor to wish you good day    <cell>Señora, nalipay aco sa paghatag canimo ug maayong adlao
<row><cell lang=en>I am delighted to see you well again    <cell>Nalipay aco sa pagquita canimo n&gtilde;a mapiscay na usab
<row><cell lang=en>You are very kind to have thought of me         <cell>Labihan ang caicog mo sa paghuna huna canaco
<row><cell lang=en>I have called at your house several times, but I have not had the pleasure of finding you at home       <cell>Dinhi na aco sa iño sa nacapila ug uala aco macadan&gtilde;at sa calipay sa paghiabut canimo sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, and I am much <corr sic=regret>regretting</corr> that I was not at home to receive you             <cell>Mao lagui, ug nasaquit aco tinuod cay uala aco sa balay sa pagdauat canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Allow me to retire                      <cell>Tuguti na aco sa pagpauli
<row><cell lang=en>You want to leave me already?           <cell>Pauli ca na ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Deign to believe that I am very sorry that I cannot stay any longer with you    <cell>Sayod ca usa n&gtilde;a masaquit aco ug daco tun&gtilde;ud cay dili aco macahimo gayud magdugay sa paguban canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I equally regret that your visit has been so short      <cell>Nasaquit aco usab tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcahamubo sa imong visita
<pb n=282 id=pb282><row><cell lang=en>What are you going to do this evening?          <cell>Onsay bubuhaton mo caron hapon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to take my sister to the theatre         <cell>May ihatod co sa teatro ang igso-on co n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, till then                    <cell>Maayo man, hasta sa paquigquita quita
<row><cell lang=en>Are you going already?                  <cell>Muadto na icao?
<row><cell lang=en>You are in great hurry                  <cell>Dinalian ca lagui
<row><cell lang=en>I must go                               <cell>Pauli aco na gayud
<row><cell lang=en>Why are you in such a hurry?            <cell>N&gtilde;ano dinalian ca sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>I have a great many things to do        <cell>Daghan man ang m&gtilde;a buluhaton co
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t forget us                         <cell>Ayao came hicalimti
<row><cell lang=en>I must take leave of you                <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a manamilit aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>We must part                            <cell>Magabulag na quita
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to take leave of you         <cell>Magaadios na aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Till I have the honor of seeing you again       <cell>Hasta sa laing paghibala ta
<row><cell lang=en>Till we meet again                      <cell>Hasta sa laing pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>Till our next meeting                   <cell>Hasta n&gtilde;a macaquita quita
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you for your visit                <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa imong pagduao
<row><cell lang=en>Your servant, Madam                     <cell>Ang imong magsisilve, Señora
<row><cell lang=en>I am at your service                    <cell>Tomanon co ang imong m&gtilde;a sugo
<pb n=283 id=pb283><row><cell lang=en>Your humble servant                     <cell>Ang ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo
<row><cell lang=en>I am very much obliged to you           <cell>Nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo sa macadaghan
<row><cell lang=en>My compliments to your brother          <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>Present my regards to your mother       <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong anan
<row><cell lang=en>Present my best wishes to your aunt     <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong ia-an
<row><cell lang=en>Present my respects to your husband     <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong bana
<row><cell lang=en>Give my kind regards to your lady       <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong asaua
<row><cell lang=en>Remember me to all at home              <cell>Icomusta aco sa imong m&gtilde;a loon
<row><cell lang=en>I will not fail                         <cell>Tumanon co gayud ang imong m&gtilde;a sugo
<row><cell lang=en>Come very often                         <cell>Muanhi ca sa masubsub
<row><cell lang=en>Good by                                 <cell>Ari na aco
<row><cell lang=en>Come again                              <cell>Balic balic
<row><cell lang=en>Alas! here is Mr. Alexander             <cell>Diay! ania si D. Alejandro
<row><cell lang=en>How do you do Mr.?                      <cell>Comusta ca Señor?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                               <cell>Sa calooy sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>I am not well, my pains shall not have an end           <cell>Dili maayo aco, ang acong m&gtilde;a saquit dili matapus sa guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>You must drive away your sadness        <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a licayan mo canang pagcamin&gtilde;ao
<pb n=284 id=pb284><row><cell lang=en>I cannot                                <cell>Dili aco macahimo
<row><cell lang=en>You must; to dispel one&apos;s sorrow the best remedy is to visit the friends        <cell>Quinahanglan man; sa paglicay sa m&gtilde;a huna huna n&gtilde;a masolobon ang labing maayong sumpa mao ang pagduao sa m&gtilde;a abian
<row><cell lang=en>All the friends are not able to dispel my sorrow        <cell>Ang tanan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a caila co dili macagahum sa pagpauala sa acong camin&gtilde;ao
<row><cell lang=en>You must try to visit them very often           <cell>Magasulay ca sa pagduao canila sa masubsub caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I should be so happy to be able to get rid of my low spirits    <cell>Paladan aco unta cun cauad-an aco sa m&gtilde;a huna huna n&gtilde;a mamin&gtilde;aon
<row><cell lang=en>To do so, you must never think of your troubles         <cell>Cay aron dan&gtilde;aton mo cana, ayao ca pagpalandong sa guihapon sa imong m&gtilde;a saquit
<row><cell lang=en>I give you many thanks for your advice          <cell>Nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo sa nacadaghan tun&gtilde;ud sa imong sambag
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t mention it                        <cell>Ayao ca pagin&gtilde;on niana. dili aco tacus
</table>


<pb n=285 id=pb285>
<div1 id=s86>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagadto sa higda-an.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I feel very sleepy                      <cell>Catologon aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> go to bed?                     <cell>Buut ca ba muhigda?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I <corr sic=will>wish</corr> I was in bed                <cell>Oo, naligad na aco unta
<row><cell lang=en>Did the servant make the bed?           <cell>Guiandam ba ang higda-an sa sologo-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but he did not change the sheets           <cell>Oo, apan uala sia magailis sa m&gtilde;a habol n&gtilde;a coquillo
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, change this pillow              <cell>Bata, ilisi quining unlan
<row><cell lang=en>These pillow-cases are not clean        <cell>Bulin&gtilde;on man quining m&gtilde;a funda
<row><cell lang=en>This blanket is very thick, I <corr sic=will>want</corr> another thin<corr> one</corr>         <cell>Mabaga caayo quining habol, buut aco ug lain n&gtilde;a maga-an (manipis)
<row><cell lang=en>Do you want any more?                   <cell>Buut pa nimo ug lain?
<row><cell lang=en>Put out the lamp                        <cell>Paln&gtilde;a ang quinqué
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me the candlestick              <cell>Iari ang palmatoria
<row><cell lang=en>Till to-morrow, good night              <cell>Hasta sa ugma, maayong gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Pleasant dreams to you                  <cell>Basin n&gtilde;a magadamgo ca sa m&gtilde;a malilipayon
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not tell the children to go to bed?          <cell>Mano dili nimo pahigda-a ang m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Because they have to sup before         <cell>Cay manihapon pa sila
<pb n=286 id=pb286><row><cell lang=en>And when do you go to bed?              <cell>Ug anosa muhigda ca?
<row><cell lang=en>I will go very soon                     <cell>Muhigda aco dayon
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the waiter to come here            <cell>Paanhion mo ang bata
<row><cell lang=en>Have you closed the shutters?           <cell>Guitacpan ba nimo ang persianas?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, Sir                                <cell>Oo, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>You had better leave them open          <cell>Ayo pa n&gtilde;a dili sirhan sila
<row><cell lang=en>Why?                                    <cell>Mano?
<row><cell lang=en>Because the weather is very warm        <cell>Cay mainit caayo ang tiempo
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock must I waken you?       <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas ipucao canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>At five o&apos;clock                         <cell>Sa a las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>All right, till to-morrow               <cell>Maayo man, hasta sa ugma
<row><cell lang=en>Good night                              <cell>Maayong gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Good night                              <cell>Adios
</table>



<div1 id=s87>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagban&gtilde;on sa higda-an.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, how did you sleep last night?     <cell>Maayong buntag, naonsa ang pagcatolog mo caron gabi-i?
<row><cell lang=en>How have you slept?                     <cell>Guionsa ang pagcatolog mo?
<row><cell lang=en>How did you rest?                       <cell>Naonsa ang pagpahoay mo?
<pb n=287 id=pb287><row><cell lang=en>Waiter, why did you not wake me?        <cell>Bata, n&gtilde;ano uala pucaoa aco nimo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is time to get up                    <cell>Horas na man sa pagban&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>Let us get up                           <cell>Muban&gtilde;on na quita
<row><cell lang=en>Come, up up                             <cell>Nan, muban&gtilde;on ca
<row><cell lang=en>Rise quickly                            <cell>Muban&gtilde;on ca sa madali
<row><cell lang=en>I have not slept very well              <cell>Uala aco matolog ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Never mind, rise                        <cell>Ualay sapayan, muban&gtilde;on ca
<row><cell lang=en>You slept without waking                <cell>Uala ca maghimata sa tibo-oc n&gtilde;a gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>No, let me sleep a little more          <cell>Uala, pasagdi pa aco ug diriot
<row><cell lang=en>Dress yourself, idle; do you not see the sunshine?    <cell>Magvisti ca, tapolan; dili maquita mo ang cahayag sa adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock did you rise?           <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas nagban&gtilde;on ca?
<row><cell lang=en>I have just up                          <cell>Caron pa nagban&gtilde;on aco
<row><cell lang=en>What time is it?                        <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas?
<row><cell lang=en>It is late                              <cell>Buntag na man
<row><cell lang=en>So soon! It can&apos;t be; I have not been in bed more than two hours        <cell>In&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a madali! Dili gayud mahimo; uala pay duha ca horas cutub sa paghigda co
<row><cell lang=en>Two hours, say nine!                    <cell>Duha da ca horas, ingnon mo siam!
<row><cell lang=en>I was sleeping so well when you called me up!           <cell>Pagcamaayo sa pagcatolog co sa pagpucao canaco!
<pb n=288 id=pb288><row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=Think>think</corr> so, but you must go up very soon           <cell>Mao man, apan quinahanglan n&gtilde;a muban&gtilde;on ca dayon
<row><cell lang=en>Pity me, I am even very sleepy          <cell>Caloy-i aco, catologon pa aco tuod
<row><cell lang=en>Make haste, and dress quickly           <cell>Dalia, ug magvisti ca sa ualay lan&gtilde;an
<row><cell lang=en>Why should I hurry so?                  <cell>Mano magdali aco sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>The boys have been in class for more than a quarter of an hour          <cell>Didto na ang m&gtilde;a bata sa escuelahan capin na sa usa ca cuarto sa horas
<row><cell lang=en>Well, cannot they begin without me?     <cell>Maayo, quinahanglan ba aco caha cay arong musugod sila sa pagescuela?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not any doubt that they can      <cell>Sa ualay duha duha dili ca quinahanglanon
<row><cell lang=en>So, let me sleep                        <cell>Busa, pacatolga aco
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot allow you to be in bed for a moment    <cell>Dili aco macatogot canimo sa paghigda pa bisan sa usa ca pagpiloc da
<row><cell lang=en>I am ready                              <cell>Listo na man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but <corr sic=is>it</corr> has not been without trouble    <cell>Mao man, apan uala mahimo cana sa ualay cabudlay
</table>


<pb n=289 id=pb289>
<div1 id=s88>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa paglacao, pagviaje, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you come from?                 <cell>Di-in ca guican?
<row><cell lang=en>I come from Bohol                       <cell>Guican aco sa Bohol
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going now?                <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to Mindanao                  <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa Mindanao
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you wish to go?                <cell>Asa buut mong pagdolong?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to go to Manila                  <cell>Buut cong pagdolong sa Manila
<row><cell lang=en>Where will you go to?                   <cell>Asa buut mong pagadto?
<row><cell lang=en>I will go home                          <cell>Buut cong pagadto sa amo
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going to?                 <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to market                    <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa tianggi
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to you                       <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa iño
<row><cell lang=en>I go to your house                      <cell>Muadto aco sa imong balay
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to the church                <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa singbahan
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to village                   <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa longsod
<row><cell lang=en>Where have you to go?                   <cell>Asa bay imong adtoon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to go to Cebu                    <cell>Dunay acong adtoon sa Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>I have to go to Tagbilaran              <cell>May acong adtoon sa Tagbilaran
<pb n=290 id=pb290><row><cell lang=en>I have to go to the church to pray the Holy Child for us        <cell>Dunay acong adtoon sa singbahan sa pagampo sa Santo Niño tun&gtilde;ud canatu
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> come with me?                  <cell>Buut ca ba muuban canaco?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> accompany me?                  <cell>Buut ca ba mucuyog canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot, for I have many things to do          <cell>Dili aco macahimo cay duna acoy daghang m&gtilde;a buhat
<row><cell lang=en>Where shall we go to?                   <cell>Asa quita padolong?
<row><cell lang=en>We shall go to take a walk              <cell>Magasodoy sodoy quita
<row><cell lang=en>Let us take your brother on our way     <cell>Hapiton ta ang imong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>We <corr sic=will>want to</corr> go and take a walk              <cell>Buut came magasodoy sodoy
<row><cell lang=en>Which way shall we go?                  <cell>Onsang dalana atung pagaguian?
<row><cell lang=en>Which way you please                    <cell>Icao magabuut
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go to your brother&apos;s             <cell>Tala na sa balay sa imong igso-on
<row><cell lang=en>With all my heart                       <cell>Sa maayong cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>I have no objection                     <cell>Uala acoy igalalis canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Let us go this way                      <cell>Pain&gtilde;on quita niining dalana
<row><cell lang=en>Where do you come from?                 <cell>Di-in ca guican?
<row><cell lang=en>I come from Mrs. Mary&apos;s                 <cell>Guican aco sa balay ni Dña. María
<pb n=291 id=pb291><row><cell lang=en>I come from your father&apos;s               <cell>Sa balay sa imong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>I come from yours                       <cell>Guican aco sa iño
<row><cell lang=en>I come from the teacher&apos;s               <cell>Sa balay sa magtoto-on
<row><cell lang=en>I come from their house                 <cell>Guican aco sa ila
<row><cell lang=en>Where is Mr. Patrick?                   <cell>Hain ba si D. Patricio?
<row><cell lang=en>You will find him at his house          <cell>Maquita mo sia sa ila
<row><cell lang=en>He is at home                           <cell>Tua sa ila
<row><cell lang=en>He is out                               <cell>Uala sa ila
<row><cell lang=en>He is going to his uncle&apos;s              <cell>Pain&gtilde;on sia sa balay sa iyang oyo-an
<row><cell lang=en>Can you tell me where he has gone to?           <cell>Mahimo ca ba magpahibalo canaco asa sia pain&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>He is just gone out                     <cell>Bag-o pa nanaog sia
<row><cell lang=en>He has gone to church                   <cell>Miadto sia sa singbahan
<row><cell lang=en>He went to the barber&apos;s                 <cell>Miadto sia sa buhatan sa mananalot
<row><cell lang=en>Let us call at the hatter&apos;s             <cell>Hapiton ta ang baliguia-an sa magbolohat sa m&gtilde;a calo
<row><cell lang=en>Let us call at your aunt                <cell>Muduao quita sa ia-an mo
<row><cell lang=en>Is Mr. Edward at home?                  <cell>Ania ba sa balay si D. Eduardo?
<row><cell lang=en>He is not at home                       <cell>Uala sia sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>He is at Mrs. Elizabeth&apos;s house         <cell>Atua sa balay ni Doña Isabel
<row><cell lang=en>Where is Mr. William going to?          <cell>Asa pain&gtilde;on si D. Guillermo?
<pb n=292 id=pb292><row><cell lang=en>I do not know where he is going to      <cell>Ambut cun asa pain&gtilde;on sia
<row><cell lang=en>Where does Mrs. Clara go?               <cell>Asa pain&gtilde;on si Dña. Clara?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                           <cell>Ambut. Inay
<row><cell lang=en>Why are you so glad?                    <cell>N&gtilde;ano malipay ca sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>Because my father called at me          <cell>Cay guiduao aco sa acong tatay
<row><cell lang=en>Why are you so sad?                     <cell>N&gtilde;ano masubu ca sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I have seen my friends passing and they have not called at my house     <cell>Cay naquita co ang acong m&gtilde;a higala n&gtilde;a miagui lang ug uala aco nila hapita
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not go out?                  <cell>Mano di ca manaog?
<row><cell lang=en>Because my steamer is just arrived      <cell>Cay guidungoan aco sa vapor
<row><cell lang=en>I am going away; it is time             <cell>Pauli na aco; horas na man
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock do you intend to come back?     <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas ipauli mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I shall be at home very soon            <cell>Mupauli aco dayon sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>I will go along with you                <cell>Mucuyog aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I will accompany you                    <cell>Ubanan ta icao. Magbolyog quita
<row><cell lang=en>You go too fast                         <cell>Icao mainsil caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I must return home                      <cell>Pilit aco mupauli sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Come back as fast as you can    <cell>Dalia ang pagpauli, ta man sa mahimo mo
<pb n=293 id=pb293><row><cell lang=en>Come back quickly                       <cell>Pauli ca sa madali
<row><cell lang=en>Will you come back again?               <cell>Mupauli na icao usab?
<row><cell lang=en>I shall see you on my return            <cell>Sibugan co icao sa pagpauli
<row><cell lang=en>I shall go to Cebu to-morrow            <cell>Ugma muadto aco sa Sugbu
<row><cell lang=en>What will you gain by it?               <cell>Onsay ipatigayon mo niana?
<row><cell lang=en>You will not get anything by it         <cell>Dili nimo pagdan&gtilde;aton ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>When do you intend to depart?           <cell>Anosa ca naghuna huna muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>I intend to depart to-morrow            <cell>Naghuna huna aco muguican ugma
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock will the steamer set out?       <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas iguican sa vapor?
<row><cell lang=en>At seven o&apos;clock in the morning         <cell>Sa a las siete sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>How far did you travel last year?       <cell>Asa ba cutub nagviaje ca sa usang tuig?
<row><cell lang=en>As far as Spain                         <cell>Cutub sa España
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of riding?                 <cell>Mahagugma ca ba man&gtilde;abayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I am very fond of it                    <cell>Mahagugma aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is it good travelling?                  <cell>Maayo ba ang pagviaje?
<row><cell lang=en>It is                                   <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of driving?                <cell>Mahagugma ca magcarruage?
<row><cell lang=en>I am                                    <cell>Oo
<pb n=294 id=pb294><row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of travelling by sea?      <cell>Mahagugma ca magviaje sa dagat?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to travel by land?          <cell>Mahagugma ca ba magviaje sa yuta?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> travel on foot?                <cell>Buut ca ba mulacao sa pagviaje?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like to travel on horse-back?    <cell>Buut ca ba man&gtilde;abayo sa pagviaje?
<row><cell lang=en>How far is it from here to Manila?      <cell>Pila ba ang cahalayo cutub dinhi hasta sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>It is not very far                      <cell>Dili man halayo caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is Cebu very far from Bohol?            <cell>Halayo ba caayo <corr sic=cutud>cutub</corr> sa Sugbu hasta sa Bohol?
<row><cell lang=en>It is near                              <cell>Dool da man
<row><cell lang=en>Has your friend already gone to Manila?         <cell>Miadto na ba ang abian mo sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>He has not yet gone, but he shall go very soon          <cell>Uala pa, apan muadto sia di na madugay
<row><cell lang=en>How far is he going?                    <cell>Asa cutub muadto sia?
<row><cell lang=en>As far as my brother&apos;s                  <cell>Cutub sa balay sa acong igso-on n&gtilde;a lalaqui
<row><cell lang=en>As far as my sisters&apos;                   <cell>Cutub sa balay sa acong m&gtilde;a igso-on n&gtilde;a babaye
<row><cell lang=en>When will you go away?                  <cell>Anosa ca muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>Very soon, because they are waiting for me at home      <cell>Dili na madugay, cay guihulat aco nila sa balay
<pb n=295 id=pb295><row><cell lang=en>Shall we set out early?                 <cell>Magmasayo ba quita sa pagguican?
<row><cell lang=en>We shall start at five o&apos;clock in the morning           <cell>Muguican quita sa a las cinco sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>We cannot start till eight o&apos;clock      <cell>Dili mahimo quita muguican hasta sa a las ocho
<row><cell lang=en>When is your brother-in-law going <corr sic=aut>out</corr>?       <cell>Anosa muguican ang imong bayao?
<row><cell lang=en>To-morrow evening                       <cell>Ugma sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>Did you go very far?                    <cell>Halayo ba caayo ang imong guilactan?
<row><cell lang=en>Not very far                            <cell>Dili halayo
<row><cell lang=en>Where is your brother?                  <cell>Hain ba ang imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>He has gone to take a walk round the garden     <cell>Didto sia nagasodoy sodoy sa tanaman
<row><cell lang=en>Where was he yesterday?                 <cell>Diin ba sia cahapon?
<row><cell lang=en>He was not at home                      <cell>Uala sia diha sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>When will that man go away?             <cell>Anosa muguican canang tao?
<row><cell lang=en>He will go immediately                  <cell>Muguican sia caron caron
<row><cell lang=en>Why has your brother gone away so soon?         <cell>N&gtilde;ano minguican ang igso-on mo in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a madali?
<row><cell lang=en>Because some friends were waiting for him       <cell>Cay guihulat sia sa iyang m&gtilde;a amigos
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you walk so fast?                <cell>N&gtilde;ano in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a mapiscay ang paglacao mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I have scarcely time to be at home at four o&apos;clock      <cell>Cay lugus macaabut aco sa balay sa a las cuatro
</table>



<pb n=296 id=pb296>
<div1 id=s89>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagpanamilit.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have to go to Europe                  <cell>Dunay acong adtoon sa Europa
<row><cell lang=en>When do you intend to depart?           <cell>Anosa naghuna huna ca muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>I intend to depart on next week         <cell>Naghuna huna aco muguican oña sa usang semana
<row><cell lang=en>When do you think of leaving?           <cell>Anosa nagatuyo ca muguican?
<row><cell lang=en>I will embark myself to-day             <cell>Buut aco musacay caron adlao
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock does the steamer start?         <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas iguican sa vapor?
<row><cell lang=en>At four o&apos;clock in the afternoon        <cell>Sa a las cuatro sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>How long do you mean to stay there?     <cell>Madugay ca ba didto?
<row><cell lang=en>Four or five months                     <cell>Upat cun lima ba ca bulan
<row><cell lang=en>I shall be happy to see you again       <cell>Malipay aco ug daco sa pagquita canimo pagusab
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any commission for Europe?     <cell>Duna bay imong togom sa Europa?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not wish to trouble you            <cell>Dili aco buut macasamoc canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Do not fail to write to us very soon            <cell>Ayao ca paghicalimot sa pagsulat canamu sa madali
<pb n=297 id=pb297><row><cell lang=en>I do not forget to do it                <cell>Dili aco malimot niana
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you a pleasant voyage            <cell>Nanin&gtilde;uha aco n&gtilde;a maayo unta ang imong viaje
<row><cell lang=en>I must go                               <cell>Muadto na aco
<row><cell lang=en>We must part                            <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a magabulag quita
<row><cell lang=en>I must take leave of you                <cell>Manamilit na aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to take leave of you         <cell>Magaadios aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Till we meet again                      <cell>Hasta sa paquigquita quita
<row><cell lang=en>I do not say good <corr sic=by>bye</corr> to you      <cell>Dili aco magaadios canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I hope to see you very soon             <cell>Milaom aco sa pagquita canimo sa dili madugay
</table>




<div1 id=s90>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagsulat.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have a letter to write to-day         <cell>May acong sulaton ug usa ca sulat caron adlao
<row><cell lang=en>Is it for the mail?                     <cell>Ipahatod ba sa correo canang sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it must leave to-night            <cell>Oo, quinahanglan n&gtilde;a muguican caron gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>You have no time to write; it is very late already      <cell>Uala ca nay tiempo sa pagsulat; hapon na man
<pb n=298 id=pb298><row><cell lang=en>I shall not be long                     <cell>Dili aco madugay
<row><cell lang=en>Do you want any note paper?             <cell>Quinahanglan ba nimo ug papel sa m&gtilde;a sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>I have a whole quire                    <cell>May aco ug usa ca booc n&gtilde;a cuadernillo
<row><cell lang=en>Lend me a sheet                         <cell>Hulami aco ug usa ca pliego
<row><cell lang=en>Be good enough to bring me some envelopes, ink, pens and sealing wax    <cell>Iari canaco pipila ca sobre, tinta, m&gtilde;a pluma ug lacre cun dao malooy ca
<row><cell lang=en>Here they are                           <cell>Ania man
<row><cell lang=en>Do you require any stamps?              <cell>Quinahanglan mo ba ang m&gtilde;a sello?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not want any                       <cell>Dili co quinahanglan
<row><cell lang=en>What day of the month is it?            <cell>Icapila quita caron?
<row><cell lang=en>It is the third                         <cell>Sa icatolo
<row><cell lang=en>No, I have only the address to write    <cell>Caron mao ray culang ang pagsulat co sa sobre
<row><cell lang=en>When does the mail start?               <cell>Anosa muguican ang correo?
<row><cell lang=en>The letters must be posted before half-past-five, if you want to forward them by the evening mail       <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a sulat didto na unta sa Administración sa a las cinco y media cun buut mo n&gtilde;a padadon sila sa correo sa hapon
<row><cell lang=en>Do you not think that this letter is too heavy?         <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on mo ba n&gtilde;a mabugat caayo quining sulat?
<pb n=299 id=pb299><row><cell lang=en>I do not think so                       <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Take these letters to the Post Office, and pay the postage of them      <cell>Dada quining m&gtilde;a sulat sa correo ug baidan mo ang m&gtilde;a sello
<row><cell lang=en>I was not in time                       <cell>Uala co hiabuti ang correo
<row><cell lang=en>Will my letters go?                     <cell>Paguicanon ba ang acong m&gtilde;a sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I arrived in time                  <cell>Oo, hiabutan co ang correo
<row><cell lang=en>Your letter will be delivered to-morrow morning         <cell>Ang sulat mo paguicanon ugma sa buntag
<row><cell lang=en>I have even to write some letters; give me some note paper      <cell>Duna pay acong sulaton ug m&gtilde;a sulat; taga-i aco ug papel
<row><cell lang=en>How much is the postage for letters to Manila?          <cell>Tagpila ang m&gtilde;a sello sa m&gtilde;a sulat sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>Two centavos                            <cell>Tagurha ca centavo ang usa ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>Can you tell me when these letters will arrive at their destination?    <cell>Arang mo ba ang pagpahibalo canaco anosa muabut quining m&gtilde;a sulat?
<row><cell lang=en>They ought to arrive within three days          <cell>Macaabut sila daguay sa icatolong adlao
<row><cell lang=en>This letter is heavy, the postage will be fifty centavos                <cell>Quining sulat mabug-at man tuod, busa magquinahanglan sia ug usa ca sello sa tagcalim-an ca centavo
<pb n=300 id=pb300><row><cell lang=en>I am expecting <corr>a </corr>letter from Manila; do me the favor to <corr sic=sent>send</corr> to the office to inquire if there are any letters for me       <cell>Nagapaabut aco ug sulat sa Manila; utang cong buut canimo ug pagsusihon mo unta sa correos cun dunay m&gtilde;a sulat canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Will you please to tell me if there are any letters arrived for me from Manila?         <cell>Arang mo ba sa pagpahibalo canaco cun duna ba acoy m&gtilde;a sulat n&gtilde;a guican sa Manila?
<row><cell lang=en>There are two ones                      <cell>Duna man ug duha ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>Take this letter to Mrs. Monica and wait for answer             <cell>Ihatod mo quining sulat can Dña. Mónica ug hulata ang balos
<row><cell lang=en>Drop this letter into the post-office box               <cell>Iholog mo quining sulat sa buzón
<row><cell lang=en>These envelopes are inferior            <cell>Quining m&gtilde;a sobre dili maayo caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Go to the stationery and buy some       <cell>Muadto ca sa baliguia-an ug papel ug paliton mo ug pila ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>Go to the Post-Office and buy a dozen stamps at twenty-five cents each          <cell>Muadto ca sa Administración ug paliton mo ug usa ca docena sa m&gtilde;a sello sa tagcaloha-an ug lima ca céntimo ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to write?              <cell>Onsay buut mong sulaton?
<pb n=301 id=pb301><row><cell lang=en>I do not wish to write anything         <cell>Dili aco buut magasulat ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Whom are you writing to?                <cell>Quinsay guisulat mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I am writing to my father               <cell>Nagasulat aco sa acong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>Have you written?                       <cell>Guisulat mo na?
<row><cell lang=en>I have                                  <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you forgotten to write to your brother?    <cell>Hincalimtan mo ba ang pagsulat sa imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not                              <cell>Uala man
<row><cell lang=en>Dear Sir                                <cell>Talahoron n&gtilde;a Guino-o (Señor)
<row><cell lang=en>Dear Madam                              <cell>Talahoron n&gtilde;a Guino-o (Señora)
<row><cell lang=en>My dear Sir                             <cell>Talahoron cong Guino-o
<row><cell lang=en>Sir                                     <cell>Guino-o
<row><cell lang=en>Madam                                   <cell>Señora
<row><cell lang=en>Miss                                    <cell>Señorita
<row><cell lang=en>Dear friend                             <cell>Hinigugma n&gtilde;a abian
<row><cell lang=en>My dear friend                          <cell>Hinigugma cong higala
<row><cell lang=en>Dear father                             <cell>Hinigugma n&gtilde;a amahan
<row><cell lang=en>My friend                               <cell>Abian co
<row><cell lang=en>I am, sir, your most obedient servant           <cell>Aco man, guino-o, ang labing matinahoron mong magsisilve
<row><cell lang=en>Your humble servant                     <cell>Ang ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo
<row><cell lang=en>Yours respectfully                      <cell>Ang imong matinahoron n&gtilde;a magsisilve
<pb n=302 id=pb302><row><cell lang=en>Your servant                            <cell>Ang ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo
<row><cell lang=en>Yours                                   <cell>Ang imong magsisilve
<row><cell lang=en>Yours truly                             <cell>Matuod n&gtilde;a magsisilve mo
</table>


<div1 id=s91>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcaon, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> dine?                                  <cell>Buut ca ba maniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to dine?                            <cell>Buut ba camo maniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>We do; we are very hungry                       <cell>Oo; guigutum came ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to eat?                        <cell>Onsay iñong cacanon?
<row><cell lang=en>We wish to eat anything                         <cell>Mucaon came ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to breakfast?                       <cell>Buut ba camo magpainit?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes                                             <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> take coffee or chocolate?              <cell>Buut camo muinom ug café cun chocolate ba?
<row><cell lang=en>We <corr sic=will>want to</corr> have chocolate                          <cell>Buut came ug chocolate
<row><cell lang=en>Do you not like coffee?                         <cell>Dili camo mahagugma ug café?
<row><cell lang=en>We do not                                       <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock do you dine every day?          <cell>Onsang horasa igpalaniodto mo sa adlao adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>I generally dine at twelve o&apos;clock              <cell>Nabatasan co ang pagpaniodto sa a las doce
<pb n=303 id=pb303><row><cell lang=en>Do the Spaniards always dine at twelve o&apos;clock?                 <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a cachila maniodto ba guihapon sa a las doce?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, they do                                    <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>They breakfast at eight o&apos;clock in the morning, dine at twelve and sup at nine in the evening                   <cell>Namahao sila sa a las ocho sa buntag, naniodto sa a las doce ug nanihapon sa a las nueve sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not ask for breakfast?               <cell>N&gtilde;ano dili ca man&gtilde;ayo ug pamahao?
<row><cell lang=en>Because it is too early                         <cell>Cay sayo pa
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to accompany me to take milk and coffee?            <cell>Buut ca ba muuban canaco sa paginom ug gatas n&gtilde;a sinactan ug café?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I <corr sic=will>want</corr>                                     <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> taste this wine?                       <cell>Buut ca macatilao niining vino?
<row><cell lang=en>Most willingly                                  <cell>Buut aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you, I do not like wine                   <cell>Diosmagbayad, dili aco muinom ug vino
<row><cell lang=en>How do you like the sherry I sent you the other day?            <cell>Onsay guihuna huna mo sa tun&gtilde;ud sa jerez n&gtilde;a guipadala co canimo sa usang adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>I like it very much                             <cell>Maayo man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is the living dear in the Philippines?          <cell>Mahal ba ang pagquinabuhi dinhi sa Filipinas?
<row><cell lang=en>It is dear in the cities, but cheap in the towns                <cell>Mahal man sa m&gtilde;a ciudad, apan barato sa m&gtilde;a longsod
<pb n=304 id=pb304><row><cell lang=en>Do you smoke immediately after dinner?          <cell>Magtabaco ca ba dayon sa human ca maniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>Not immediately                                 <cell>Dili dayon
<row><cell lang=en>Have you anything to offer me?                  <cell>Duna bay imong idalit canaco?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> have anything to eat?                  <cell>Buut ca ba mucaon ug bisan onsa?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I <corr sic=will>want</corr>                                     <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>I have some good ham, meat, bread and wine      <cell>May acong maayong jamón, carne, pan ug vino
<row><cell lang=en>What time shall we dine to-day?                 <cell>Onsang horas ipaniodto ta caron adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>The cloth will be laid presently                <cell>Caron caron andamon ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Is the dinner on the table?                     <cell>Listo na ba ang paniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is                                      <cell>Oo, listo na
<row><cell lang=en>Let us sit down                                 <cell>Manlingcod quita
<row><cell lang=en>Do you expect company?                          <cell>Duna bay imong inabi abi?
<row><cell lang=en>I expect Mr. Paul                               <cell>Duna man si D. Pablo. Guihulat co si D. Pablo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you given orders for dinner?               <cell>Guipanagana mo ba ang lamesa?
<row><cell lang=en>What have you ordered?                          <cell>Onsay guisugo mo?
<pb n=305 id=pb305><row><cell lang=en>What shall we have for dinner?                  <cell>Onsay atung igpaniodto?
<row><cell lang=en>What shall we have for supper?                  <cell>Onsay atung igpalanihapon?
<row><cell lang=en>Shall we have any fish?                         <cell>Mucaon ba quita ug isda?
<row><cell lang=en>There was no fish in the market                 <cell>Ualay isda sa tianggi
<row><cell lang=en>Let us begin dinner                             <cell>Nan, maniodto na quita
<row><cell lang=en>What may I offer you?                           <cell>Onsay idolot co canimo?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> have some soup?                        <cell>Mahagugma ca ba ug sopa?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> take some soup?                        <cell>Buut ca mucaon ug sopa?
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you                                       <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a little beef                           <cell>Taga-i aco ug diriot n&gtilde;a onod sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>It looks very nice                              <cell>Maayo man quini daguay
<row><cell lang=en>This fowl is delicious                          <cell>Quining manuc malamion caayo
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> have a wing?                           <cell>Buut ca ug usa ca paco?
<row><cell lang=en>If you please                                   <cell>Icao magabuut
<row><cell lang=en>I will thank you for some gravy                 <cell>Doloti aco ug diriot n&gtilde;a sabao (salsa)
<row><cell lang=en>Shall I give you some vegetables?               <cell>Buut ca ba ug m&gtilde;a olotanon?
<row><cell lang=en>I will take some salad                          <cell>Mucaon aco ug binachao
<row><cell lang=en>May I offer you a piece of this roast beef?     <cell>Buut ca ug usa ca pinotol niining asado?
<row><cell lang=en>I will willingly take a small piece             <cell>Mucaon aco gayud ug usa ca diotay n&gtilde;a pinotol
<pb n=306 id=pb306><row><cell lang=en>This salad is no good                           <cell>Dili maayo quining quinilao
<row><cell lang=en>There is a roast sucking-pig                    <cell>Duna man ug usa ca inasal
<row><cell lang=en>I will taste it only                            <cell>Macatilao aco lang niana
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic="Will you">Do you want to</corr> have it well done?                     <cell>Buut ca ba sa guiasal ug maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes                                             <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Give me some meat                               <cell>Paambita aco sa carne
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have it well done?                     <cell>Mahagugma ca ba sa linatan ug maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, but not too much                           <cell>Oo, apan ayao paglabihi
<row><cell lang=en>Let me take fish                                <cell>Pacana aco ug isda
<row><cell lang=en>How do you like it?                             <cell>Maayo ba caha?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like it very much                      <cell>Dili maayo caayo. Dili aco mahagugma caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any good cheese?                       <cell>Duna bay imong queso n&gtilde;a maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Please bring some                               <cell>Doloti aco ug diotay
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a bit of it                             <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca pinotol
<row><cell lang=en>Which <corr sic="will you">do you want to</corr> have?                            <cell>Onsay buut mo?
<row><cell lang=en>You give me too much                            <cell>Guitaga-an aco nimo ug daghan
<row><cell lang=en>Give me that small bit                          <cell>Taga-i aco nianang pinotol n&gtilde;a diotay
<row><cell lang=en>Give me but the half of it                      <cell>Taga-i aco ang picas da niana
<row><cell lang=en>Cut that in two                                 <cell>Picasa cana
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want</corr> no more                                  <cell>Dili na aco buut ug lain
<pb n=307 id=pb307><row><cell lang=en>We have had a good dinner                       <cell>Naniodto quita ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, bring the dessert                       <cell>Bata, iari ang postre
<row><cell lang=en>There are bananas, pine-apples <corr sic=ang>and</corr> mangoes              <cell>Dunay m&gtilde;a saguing, piñas ug manga
<row><cell lang=en>What do you prefer?                             <cell>Onsay palabihon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer to take this mango                     <cell>Guipalabi co ang pagcaon niining manga
<row><cell lang=en>Bring us some wine                              <cell>Dadi came ug vino
<row><cell lang=en>What wine would you like?                       <cell>Onsang vinoha ang ilimnon niño?
<row><cell lang=en>This claret is delicious                        <cell>Maayo caayo quining Burdeos
<row><cell lang=en>Let us have a bottle of champagne               <cell>Muinom quita ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a champan
<row><cell lang=en>Do you care <corr>for </corr>this wine?                  <cell>Nahagugma ba camo niining vino?
<row><cell lang=en>I like <corr sic=is>it</corr> very much                       <cell>Aco nahagugma caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like it                                <cell>Aco dili mahagugma
<row><cell lang=en>Dinner is over                                  <cell>Tapus na ang paniodto
<row><cell lang=en>You may clear the table                         <cell>Hauan&gtilde;i na ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Now, let me offer you a cigar, what do <corr sic=yo>you</corr> wish?          <cell>Caron dalitan co icao ug usa ca tabaco, onsay tin&gtilde;uhaon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see                                      <cell>Paquita-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>This is an excellent cigar                      <cell>Quini mao ang usa ca tabaco n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Please take another                             <cell>Coha-a ug lain
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, the bill of fare, please                <cell>Bata, dada diri ang cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>Here it is, Sir                                 <cell>Ania man, Señor
<pb n=308 id=pb308><row><cell lang=en>Here is your account, Sir                       <cell>Ania man ang cuenta mo, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>You may keep the change                         <cell>Tipigan mo ang isulucli
</table>



<div1 id=s92>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a ilimnon.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are you thirsty?                                <cell>Nauhao ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am                                       <cell>Oo, nauhao aco
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to drink?                      <cell>Onsay buut mong paginom?
<row><cell lang=en>Give me something                               <cell>Taga-i aco ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a glass of beer                         <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca vasong cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Serve me a glass of water                       <cell>Taga-i aco ug tubig sa vaso
<row><cell lang=en>Make me a cup of chocolate                      <cell>Ibuhat aco ug chocolate
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me a cup of tea                           <cell>Dad-i aco ug usa ca taza n&gtilde;a sha
<row><cell lang=en>I should take coffee                            <cell><corr sic=Muinon>Muinom</corr> aco unta ug café
<row><cell lang=en>Have you good wine?                             <cell>Duna bay imong vino n&gtilde;a maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have, what do you wish to take?          <cell>Oo, onsang vinoha iinom mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish a cup of sherry                          <cell>Buut aco ug usa ca copa n&gtilde;a Jerez
<row><cell lang=en>There are Spanish, French and American wines    <cell>Dunay m&gtilde;a vino n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain sa España, Francia ug América
<pb n=309 id=pb309><row><cell lang=en>Give me a glass of Malaga wine                  <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca vasong Málaga
<row><cell lang=en>This Champagne is no good                       <cell>Dili maayo quining Champagne
<row><cell lang=en>Make me a lemonade                              <cell>Ibuhat aco ug limonada
<row><cell lang=en>Let it be iced                                  <cell>N&gtilde;a mabagtog (helada) unta
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me an ice                                 <cell>Dad-i aco ug usa ca helado
<row><cell lang=en>Bring a bottle of soda water                    <cell>Dada diri ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a soda
<row><cell lang=en>Bring a bottle of stout                         <cell>Dada diri ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a cervezang maitum
<row><cell lang=en>I like milk                                     <cell>Buut aco ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>What milk will you drink?                       <cell>Onsang gatasa imnon mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Goats-milk                                      <cell>Gatas sa canding
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like cows-milk                         <cell>Dili aco mahagugma ug gatas sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Make me a refreshing drink with orange          <cell>Ipanagana canaco ug usa ca mabugnao n&gtilde;a ilimnon sa ucban
<row><cell lang=en>Put a few drops of cognac in it                 <cell>Ibutang mo ug pila ca tolo n&gtilde;a coñac
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like it very cold?                       <cell>Buut ca ba niana n&gtilde;a mabugnao caayo?
<row><cell lang=en>In its natural state                            <cell>Sa iyang pagcana-a n&gtilde;a caogalin&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the servant to bring coffee                <cell>Ipahatod mo diri sa sologo-on ug café
<pb n=310 id=pb310><row><cell lang=en>How do you like it?                             <cell>Onsaon mo paginom niana?
<row><cell lang=en>I like it with milk                             <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a sinactan ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer it without milk                        <cell>Guipalabi co ang paginom niana sa ualay gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to bring some sugar also               <cell>Padadon mo sia usab ug azucar
<row><cell lang=en>Will you take it hot or cold?                   <cell>Buut ca ba niana n&gtilde;a mainit cun mabugnao?
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want</corr> it neither hot nor cold        <cell>Buut aco niana n&gtilde;a dili mainit ug mabugnao
<row><cell lang=en>This water is salted                            <cell>Asgad man quining tubig
<row><cell lang=en>Where is it from?                               <cell>Sa onsa quini?
<row><cell lang=en>It is from well                                 <cell>Sa atabay
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the servant to take water from fountain    <cell>In&gtilde;na ang sologo-on n&gtilde;a man&gtilde;alos sia sa tubud
<row><cell lang=en>I am sick, I should take a cup of chamomile     <cell>Masaquit aco, muinom aco unta ug usa ca taza n&gtilde;a manzanilla
<row><cell lang=en>Make me a cup of good broth                     <cell>Ibuhat aco ug usa ca taza sa sabao n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Have the goodness to prepare a sweet drink      <cell>Ibuhat aco unta ug usa ca ilimnon n&gtilde;a matamis
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the cook to prepare a bitter drink         <cell>In&gtilde;na ang cocinero n&gtilde;a ipanagana canaco ug usa ca ilimnon n&gtilde;a mapaet
<row><cell lang=en>It is insipid                                   <cell>Matab-ang quini
<pb n=311 id=pb311><row><cell lang=en>This coffee is very bitter                      <cell>Mapaet caayo quining café
<row><cell lang=en>Put some sugar in it                            <cell>Ibutang mo ug azucar
<row><cell lang=en>I am no longer thirsty                          <cell>Napalong na ang acong cauhao
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like to drink any more                 <cell>Dili na aco muinom ug bisan onsa
</table>



<div1 id=s93>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagvisti.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What has that servant done with my short-coat?                 <cell>Onsay guibuhat nianang sologo-on sa acong americana?
<row><cell lang=en>He has put it to dry because it is very wet                     <cell>Guibulad nia sa adlao cay mahumud man tinood
<row><cell lang=en>Does that coat fit you?                         <cell>An&gtilde;ayan ca ba nianang americana?
<row><cell lang=en>It does not                                     <cell>Dili an&gtilde;ayan
<row><cell lang=en>If that lady likes the white neckerchief, she may dispose of it                 <cell>Cun mahagugma canang señora sa paño n&gtilde;a maputi, sia lang magabuut niana
<row><cell lang=en>This hat does not fit your brother              <cell>Dili an&gtilde;ayan ang imong igso-on niining calo
<row><cell lang=en>Is your mother pleased with the shawl I sent her yesterday?     <cell>Guihigugma ba sa inahan mo ang chal n&gtilde;a guipahatud co cania cahapon?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, she is                                     <cell>Oo, guihigugma nia
<row><cell lang=en>Are you pleased with the coat the tailor made you?              <cell>Mian&gtilde;ay ca ba sa americana n&gtilde;a guibuhat sa mananahi?
<pb n=312 id=pb312><row><cell lang=en>No, for it does not fit me                      <cell>Dili, cay dili an&gtilde;ayan aco nia<corr sic="?"></corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not put on your new boots?           <cell>Mano dili ca magsapin sa m&gtilde;a bota n&gtilde;a bag-o?
<row><cell lang=en>Because they do not fit me; I tried to put them on this morning and could not succeed           <cell>Cay dili an&gtilde;ayan aco nila; guisulay co ang pagsapin canila ganina sa buntag ug uala co mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Where are you going now?                        <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to dress myself                      <cell>Magailis aco
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me a clean shirt                          <cell>Dad-i aco ug usa ca sinina n&gtilde;a limpio
<row><cell lang=en>Are my shoes cleaned?                           <cell>Limpio ba ang acong m&gtilde;a sapin?
<row><cell lang=en>Are they blackened?                             <cell>Guibetunan ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, they are                                   <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Where are my slippers?                          <cell>Hain ba ang acong sinelas?
<row><cell lang=en>They are under the table                        <cell>Tua sa ilalum sa lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Will you be shaved?                             <cell>Paalot ca ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I will not                                      <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Get my razors                                   <cell>Dada diri ang m&gtilde;a navaja
<row><cell lang=en>Brush my clothes                                <cell>Cepillahi ang acong visti
<pb n=313 id=pb313><row><cell lang=en>Help me on with my coat                         <cell>Taban&gtilde;i aco sa pagsoob sa americana
<row><cell lang=en>Have you forgotten anything?                    <cell>Hincalimtan mo ba ug bisan onsa?
<row><cell lang=en>I have forgotten the watch that is on the chair                 <cell>Hincalimtan co ang horasan n&gtilde;a atua sa silla
<row><cell lang=en>You had better to take your umbrella because it will rain       <cell>Maayo pa n&gtilde;a magadala ca sa payong cay magaolan
<row><cell lang=en>Give me the spectacles                          <cell>Iari canaco ang anteojos
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to shift my shirt                    <cell>Magailis aco sa acong sinina
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me change of clothes for I will dress myself              <cell>Iari canaco ug ilisan cay magailis aco
<row><cell lang=en>Put on those trousers                           <cell>Magcalsones ca nianang calsones
<row><cell lang=en>Take off those new clothes                      <cell>Hocasa canang visti n&gtilde;a bag-o
<row><cell lang=en>I want to dress myself                          <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a magailis aco
<row><cell lang=en>Have you dressed yourselves?                    <cell>Nanagilis na camo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, we have                                    <cell>Oo, human na
<row><cell lang=en>Have you done dressing?                         <cell>Human na camo magilis?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to comb my hair                          <cell>Magasudlay pa aco
<row><cell lang=en>Here is the washer-woman                       <cell>Ania man ang lavandera
<pb n=314 id=pb314><row><cell lang=en>Count the linen                                 <cell>Ihapa ang binunacan
<row><cell lang=en>Is there anything missing?                      <cell>Duna bay culang?
<row><cell lang=en>There are a pair of trousers, two towels and a sock missing     <cell>Culang usa ca calsones, duha ca pamahidan ug usa ca booc n&gtilde;a calcetines
<row><cell lang=en>These shirts are not well ironed                <cell>Dili maayo ang pagutao niining m&gtilde;a sinina
<row><cell lang=en>Put a little more stiffening                    <cell>Dugan&gtilde;i pa ug diriot n&gtilde;a almidón
<row><cell lang=en>Starch well the collars                         <cell>Almidonan ug maayo ang m&gtilde;a cuello
<row><cell lang=en>I must have them to-morrow                     <cell>Ugma quinahanglan co sila
<row><cell lang=en>Have you brought the bill?                      <cell>Nagdala ca ba sa cuenta?
<row><cell lang=en>Here it is                                      <cell>Ania man
<row><cell lang=en>Take your money                                 <cell>Dauata ang sohol
<row><cell lang=en>Your boy has soiled my shirt                    <cell>Ang bata mo nagbuling sa acong sinina
<row><cell lang=en>Bring and wash it again                         <cell>Dada ug bunac-i pagusab
<row><cell lang=en>Bring the dirty linen                           <cell>Dada ang bulunacan
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, good by                              <cell>Maayo man, ari na aco
<row><cell lang=en>Good by                                         <cell>Adios
</table>



<div1 id=s94>
<head>Paquigpulong sa bata bata.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Somebody knocks                                 <cell>Dunay tao n&gtilde;a nagatoctoc
<row><cell lang=en>Go and see who it is                            <cell>Susihon mo cun quinsa ba sia
<pb n=315 id=pb315><row><cell lang=en>Go and open the door                            <cell>Lucaban mo ang pulta
<row><cell lang=en>Who is it?                                      <cell>Quinsa ba?
<row><cell lang=en>It is I                                         <cell>Aco man
<row><cell lang=en>Come in                                         <cell>Musulud ca
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, who rings?                              <cell>Bata, quinsay nagatauag?
<row><cell lang=en>It is Mr. Thomas                                <cell>Si D. Tomás
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to <corr sic=came>come</corr> in          <cell>Pasudla sia
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to sit down                            <cell>Palingcoron mo sia
<row><cell lang=en>A gentleman wants to see you                    <cell>Usa ca dacong tao buut magaduao canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to come up                             <cell>Pasaca sia
<row><cell lang=en>Where is he?                                    <cell>Hain ba sia?
<row><cell lang=en>He will be back in an hour                      <cell>Mubalic sia sa sulud sa usa ca horas
<row><cell lang=en>Have you asked him for his card?                <cell>Guipan&gtilde;ayoan mo ba sia sa tarjeta?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Has the washer-woman brought my linen?          <cell>Guidala ba ang binunacan sa lavandera?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I saw the wash-list and there is nothing wanting          <cell>Oo, naquita co ang lista sa binunacan ug ualay culang
<row><cell lang=en>Have you paid her bill?                         <cell>Guibaydan mo ba ang iyang cuenta?
<row><cell lang=en>No, for I have no money                         <cell>Uala, cay uala acoy salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Pay her to-morrow                               <cell>Baydan mo sia ugma
<row><cell lang=en>I will do it                                    <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Take this dirty linen and send it to her        <cell>Hipusa quining bulunacan ug iadto mo cania
<row><cell lang=en>Has the shoemaker brought my boots?             <cell>Guidala ba sa magbuluhat ug sapin sa acong botas?
<pb n=316 id=pb316><row><cell lang=en>He has not yet                                  <cell>Uala pa
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me my slippers                            <cell>Iari ang acong sinelas
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me my shoes                               <cell>Dad-i aco sa m&gtilde;a sapin
<row><cell lang=en>Did the tailor bring my clothes?                <cell>Guidala na sa mananahi ang acong m&gtilde;a visti?
<row><cell lang=en>He did                                          <cell>Guidala na
<row><cell lang=en>Where are they?                                 <cell>Hain ba sila?
<row><cell lang=en>I put them into the bureau                      <cell>Guisulud co sa cómoda
<row><cell lang=en>Where is my hat?                                <cell>Hain ba ang acong calo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is on the chair                              <cell>Tua sa silla
<row><cell lang=en>Bring my stick                                  <cell>Iari ang acong bastón
<row><cell lang=en>Take those trousers                             <cell>Hipusa canang calsones
<row><cell lang=en>Keep those shirts                               <cell>Tipig-i canang m&gtilde;a sinina
<row><cell lang=en>Put this necklace into the trunk                <cell>Isulud sa caban quining cuentas
<row><cell lang=en>Sew this handkerchief                           <cell>Tahia quining paño
<row><cell lang=en>Open the door of my room                        <cell>Ocabi ang pulta sa acong cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Open the blinds of the parlor                   <cell>Ablihi ang persianas sa salas
<row><cell lang=en>Lock the trunk                                  <cell>Llavihi ang caban
<row><cell lang=en>Wind up the clock                               <cell>Llavihi ang horasan
<row><cell lang=en>Sweep the parlor                                <cell>Silhigi ang salas
<row><cell lang=en>Dust the table                                  <cell>Paspasa ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Make the bed                                    <cell>Ipanagana ang higda-an
<row><cell lang=en>Spread the straw-bed                            <cell>Buclari ang banig
<row><cell lang=en>Put the table in order                          <cell>Itaod mo ang lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>Put the lamp in order                           <cell>Ayoha ang quinqué
<pb n=317 id=pb317><row><cell lang=en>Scour the tube                                  <cell>Hinisan mo ang tubo
<row><cell lang=en>Cut off the wick                                <cell>Putla ang mecha
<row><cell lang=en>Lock the bureau because one drawer is opened    <cell>Llavihi ang cómoda cay inocab ug usa ca cajón
<row><cell lang=en>Go to the market and buy some meal              <cell>Muadto ca sa tianggi ug paliton mo ug calanon
<row><cell lang=en>Accompany me                                    <cell>Uban-i aco
<row><cell lang=en>Help me to dress myself                         <cell>Taban&gtilde;i aco sa pagvisti
<row><cell lang=en>Take off my socks                               <cell>Holbota ang acong calcetines
<row><cell lang=en>Come for me                                     <cell>Apasa aco
<row><cell lang=en>Wait a moment                                   <cell>Hulat usa. Ayao usa
<row><cell lang=en>I am going out and you must keep the house      <cell>Manaog aco ug icao magabantay unta sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Water the flowers                               <cell>Boboa ang m&gtilde;a bulac
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the children to go to school               <cell>Paadtoon mo ang m&gtilde;a bata sa escuelahan
<row><cell lang=en>Send for the children                           <cell>Ipacoha ang m&gtilde;a bata
<row><cell lang=en>Take those clothes away                         <cell>Maghocot ca nianang m&gtilde;a visti
<row><cell lang=en>You must stay at home                           <cell>Pabilin ca sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>You must not go out                             <cell>Dili ca manaog
<row><cell lang=en>Who has the key of the trunk?                   <cell>Hain ba ang llave sa caban?
<row><cell lang=en>Peter has it                                    <cell>Tua can Pedro
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the broom?                             <cell>Hain ba ang silhig?
<row><cell lang=en>The servant has it                              <cell>Tua sa sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know where it is                       <cell>Ambut cun hain ba
<pb n=318 id=pb318><row><cell lang=en>Arrange the room                                <cell>Husaya ang cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Wake the child&apos;s nurse                          <cell>Pucaua ang iua
<row><cell lang=en>Tell the coachman to put the horses at ten o&apos;clock              <cell>Ipataod mo sa cochero ang carruage sa a las diez
<row><cell lang=en>Bring me up some newspapers                     <cell>Hagdi aco ug m&gtilde;a mantala-an
<row><cell lang=en>Give this money to the merchant                 <cell>Iadto quining salapi sa comerciante
<row><cell lang=en>Send this book to the bookseller                <cell>Iadto quining libro sa librero
<row><cell lang=en>Give orders to the cook                         <cell>Ihatag mo ug sugo sa cocinero
<row><cell lang=en>Butcher the goat                                <cell>Ihaoa ang canding
<row><cell lang=en>Give this letter to Mr. Alphonso                <cell>Iadto quining sulat can D. Alfonso
<row><cell lang=en>Send <corr sic=this>these</corr> letters to the Post-Office     <cell>Ihatod quining m&gtilde;a sulat sa correo
<row><cell lang=en>Feed the pigs                                   <cell>Laloga ang m&gtilde;a babuy
<row><cell lang=en>Feed the cats                                   <cell>Pacana ang m&gtilde;a iring
<row><cell lang=en>Go for water                                    <cell>Man&gtilde;alos ca
<row><cell lang=en>Go for milk                                     <cell>Magcoha ca ug gatas
<row><cell lang=en>Send for bread                                  <cell>Ipacoha ug pan
</table>



<div1 id=s95>
<head>Paquigpulong sa usa ca mananahi.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good evening, Sir                               <cell>Maayong hapon, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Can you make a pair of trousers?                <cell>Mahimo ca ba pagbuhat ug usa ca calsones?
<row><cell lang=en>I can                                           <cell>Mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see your <corr sic=pattenrs>patterns</corr>              <cell>Paquitaon aco sa m&gtilde;a modelo
<pb n=319 id=pb319><row><cell lang=en>Is it the only color you have?                  <cell>Mao da ba quini ang color n&gtilde;a na-a canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>There is another                                <cell>Ania man ug lain
<row><cell lang=en>It is of no use                                 <cell>Ualay pulus quini
<row><cell lang=en>It is too heavy                                 <cell>Mabug-at man quini
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like another more thin?                  <cell>Buut ca ba ug lain n&gtilde;a manipis?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like that white cloth                  <cell>Dili aco mahagugma nianang panapton n&gtilde;a maputi
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see another                              <cell>Paquita-a aco ug lain
<row><cell lang=en>Measure me for a coat                           <cell>Sucdi aco sa usa ca americana
<row><cell lang=en>How will you have it made?                      <cell>Onsang daguaya ang guitin&gtilde;uha mo?
<row><cell lang=en>As they wear it now                             <cell>Main&gtilde;on sa batasan caron
<row><cell lang=en>Make it after the present fashion               <cell>Main&gtilde;on sa <corr sic="bag ong">bag-ong</corr> uso
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you also to make a pair of pantaloons    <cell>Ibuhat aco usab ug usa ca calsones
<row><cell lang=en>There is no objection to make it                <cell>Ualay cabilinggan sa pagbuhat niana
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have them loose or tight?              <cell>Buut ca n&gtilde;a haloag cun haictin ang calsones?
<row><cell lang=en>I like them to be loose                         <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a haloag
<row><cell lang=en>I will make them as you like                    <cell>Buhaton co siya sumala sa pagbuut mo
<row><cell lang=en>When can you finish to make them?               <cell>Anosa magtibauas ca sa pagtahi niana?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know                                   <cell>Ambut
<pb n=320 id=pb320><row><cell lang=en>Make some shirts for me also                    <cell>Ibuhat aco usab ug pila ca sinina
<row><cell lang=en>When will they be done?                         <cell>Anosa mahuman caha sila?
<row><cell lang=en>As soon as I can                                <cell>Madali in&gtilde;on sa mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you cut my coat out?                       <cell>Guitabas mo na ang americana?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not yet                                  <cell>Uala pa
<row><cell lang=en>Have you not brought my trousers?               <cell>Uala pa icao magdala sa calsones?
<row><cell lang=en>They are not yet finished                       <cell>Uala pa mahuman
<row><cell lang=en>How much do I owe you?                          <cell>Pila ba ang guiutang co canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>I will send you the bill                        <cell>Ipahatod co canimo ang cuenta
</table>



<div1 id=s96>
<head>Paquigpulong na magbabaliguia ug papel, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Give me some note paper                         <cell>Taga-i aco ug papel sa m&gtilde;a sulat
<row><cell lang=en>Ruled or unruled?                               <cell>Binadlisan cun dili binadlisan?
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer it without                             <cell>Guipalabi co ang dili binadlisan
<row><cell lang=en>This is thick                                   <cell>Mabaga man quini
<row><cell lang=en>I want it <corr sic=thim>thin</corr>            <cell>Buut aco ug lain n&gtilde;a manipis
<row><cell lang=en>How much is it a quire?                         <cell>Tagpila ba ang usa ca cuadernillo?
<row><cell lang=en>Give me some envelopes also                     <cell>Taga-i aco ug m&gtilde;a sobre usab
<pb n=321 id=pb321><row><cell lang=en>Show me some penholders                       <cell>Ipaquita canaco ug m&gtilde;a mango
<row><cell lang=en>This one is too heavy                           <cell>Quini mabug-at man
<row><cell lang=en>This is very good                               <cell>Maayo man quini
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see that penknife                      <cell>Paquita-a aco nianang cortaplumas
<row><cell lang=en>Have you ink?                                   <cell>Duna bay imong tinta?
<row><cell lang=en>I want a bottle of ink                          <cell>Quinahanglan co ug usa ca frasco n&gtilde;a tinta
<row><cell lang=en>This is very dear                               <cell>Mahal caayo quini
<row><cell lang=en>Show me some pens                               <cell>Ipaquita canaco ug m&gtilde;a pluma
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any gold pens?                         <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a pluma n&gtilde;a bulauan?
<row><cell lang=en>I have but these steel pens                     <cell>Uala aco cun dili quining m&gtilde;a pluma n&gtilde;a acero
<row><cell lang=en>I want some pencils                             <cell>Quinahanglan co ug m&gtilde;a lapis
<row><cell lang=en>There are many kinds of them                    <cell>Duna man ug daghang m&gtilde;a calainan nila
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish?                               <cell>Onsay imong tin&gtilde;uhaon?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish some black and red                       <cell>Buut co ug pipila n&gtilde;a maitum ug mapola
<row><cell lang=en>How much have I to pay for one of this kind?    <cell>Tagpila man sa usa ca booc niining calainan?
<row><cell lang=en>Five cents each                                 <cell>Tagilma ca céntimo ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Here is the price, good by                      <cell>Ania man ang bayad, ari na aco
</table>


<pb n=322 id=pb322>
<div1 id=s97>
<head>Paquigpulong sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a mueble.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I want to purchase furniture for an apartment                   <cell>Buut aco unta mupalit ug casangcapan sa usa ca sulud
<row><cell lang=en>Show me some furniture                          <cell>Paquita-a aco sa m&gtilde;a mueble
<row><cell lang=en>Walk into the warehouse                         <cell>Sumulud ca sa almacén
<row><cell lang=en>You will find in my warehouse all you require                   <cell>Sa acong almacén hipalgan mo ang tanan n&gtilde;a imong quinahanglanon
<row><cell lang=en>I should like something handsome, but not too dear              <cell>Buut aco unta ug m&gtilde;a mueble n&gtilde;a maanindut, apan n&gtilde;a dili mahal caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Is your apartment large, sir?                   <cell>Daco ba ang imong pinuyanan, Señor?
<row><cell lang=en>Tolerably, specially the drawing-room           <cell>Arang arang, labi pa ang salas
<row><cell lang=en>I have a set of drawing-room furniture which will just suit you                 <cell>May aco ug usa ca hingpit n&gtilde;a casangcapan sa usa ca salas n&gtilde;a sa uala ing duha duha muan&gtilde;ay canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see the chairs                           <cell>Paquita-a aco sa m&gtilde;a silla
<row><cell lang=en>There are of several kinds                      <cell>Duna man sa lain lain n&gtilde;a daguaya
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any arm-chairs?                       <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a butaca?
<pb n=323 id=pb323><row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo, duna man
<row><cell lang=en>It is no good, I do not like this arm-chair     <cell>Dili maayo quini, dili aco mahagugma niining butaca
<row><cell lang=en>All right, I have another                       <cell>Maayo man, duna acoy lain
<row><cell lang=en>This has a foot broken                          <cell>Ang usa ca ti-il niini naputul man. Piang man quini
<row><cell lang=en>I have no other                                 <cell>Uala acoy lain
<row><cell lang=en>Show me some sofas and tables                   <cell>Ipaquita canaco ug m&gtilde;a canapé ug m&gtilde;a lamesa
<row><cell lang=en>You can see these tables, they are very good    <cell>Quitaon mo quining m&gtilde;a lamesa, maayo man sila
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for this?                   <cell>Tagpila ba quini?
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty pesos                                    <cell>Tagcaloha-an ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Can you not give for less?                      <cell>Dili ca macacubus sa vale?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot                                        <cell>Dili aco macahimo
<row><cell lang=en>How many chairs do you wish to buy?             <cell>Pila ca silla imong paliton?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to buy six chairs and two arm-chairs     <cell>Buut aco unta mupalit ug unum ca silla ug duha ca butaca
<row><cell lang=en>I have of many kinds, you can choose as you like                <cell>May aco sa daghang m&gtilde;a calainan, pilion mo in&gtilde;on sa imong guitin&gtilde;uha
<pb n=324 id=pb324><row><cell lang=en>Is this furniture good and new?                 <cell>Maayo ba ug bag-o quining m&gtilde;a mueble?
<row><cell lang=en>You see it is quite new, it is just come from the workman       <cell>Icao nagasulong n&gtilde;a bag-o man gayud, human na caron buhata sa panday
<row><cell lang=en>Is it substantial?                              <cell>Malig-on ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Both substantial and elegant                    <cell>Malig-on ug maanindut
<row><cell lang=en>Indeed, this is very beautiful                  <cell>Matuod man, quini matahum caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Here is a round-stand, do you like it?          <cell>Ania man ang usa ca velador, mahagugma ca niini?
<row><cell lang=en>I like if it is not very dear                   <cell>Mahagugma aco cun dili sia mahal ogaling
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for it?                     <cell>Pilay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo tun&gtilde;ud niini?
<row><cell lang=en>Five pesos                                      <cell>Lima ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>All right, I will buy it                        <cell>Maayo man, paliton co sia
<row><cell lang=en>Are there carpets?                              <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a alfombra?
<row><cell lang=en>There are some                                  <cell>Duna man
<row><cell lang=en>Do not forget that I shall want some of them    <cell>Dili mo hicalimtan n&gtilde;a iquinahanglan co ug pila ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>Never fear, Sir. I send you all you have bought                 <cell>Ayao pagpalandong ca niana, Señor. Ipahatod co canimo ang tanan n&gtilde;a guipalit mo
<pb n=325 id=pb325><row><cell lang=en>Have you a bureau and a pier-table?             <cell>Duna bay imo ug usa ca cómoda ug usa ca consola?
<row><cell lang=en>I have some of different sizes                  <cell>Duna man aco sa lain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a daguaya
<row><cell lang=en>How many drawers are there in the bureau?       <cell>Pila ca cajón ang na-a sa cómoda?
<row><cell lang=en>Four drawers and a writing-desk                 <cell>Upat ca cajón ug usa ca sulatan
<row><cell lang=en>I like it                                       <cell>Paliton co sia. Nahagugma aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>I want a rocking-chair also                     <cell>Quinahanglan co usab ug usa ca lia-lia
<row><cell lang=en>I should see your washing-stands<corr>,</corr> night-tables and cup-boards, but I have no time to finish my purchases           <cell>Quitaon co unta ang m&gtilde;a panhunauan, m&gtilde;a lamesa de noche ug m&gtilde;a aparador, apan uala coy tiempo sa pagtibauas sa m&gtilde;a palaliton
</table>



<div1 id=s98>
<head>Paquigpulong sa magbaliliguia sa m&gtilde;a sinina, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, have you shirts?                  <cell>Maayong buntag, duna bay imong m&gtilde;a sinina?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have shirts already made                 <cell>Oo, dunay acong m&gtilde;a sinina n&gtilde;a binuhat na
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any to my measure?                     <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a sinina n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>You can see, there are linen, silk and cotton shirts            <cell>Susihon mo, dunay m&gtilde;a sinina n&gtilde;a hilo, seda ug gapas
<pb n=326 id=pb326><row><cell lang=en>I do not find one suits me                      <cell>Dili aco macaquita bisan usa n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay canaco
<row><cell lang=en>How many days will you require to make me a dozen?              <cell>Pila ca adlao madugay ca sa pagbuhat ug usa ca docenas?
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps a week?                                 <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali usa ca semana
<row><cell lang=en>Show me some silk for shirts                    <cell>Paquita-a aco ug seda n&gtilde;a sininaon
<row><cell lang=en>I like this kind                                <cell>Buut aco niining calainan
<row><cell lang=en>Can you make me also half a dozen of flannel shirts?            <cell>Mahimo mong pagbuhat usab ug unum ca sinina n&gtilde;a franela?
<row><cell lang=en>I can                                           <cell>Mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Take my measure                                 <cell>Sucdi aco
<row><cell lang=en>I wish cotton shirts with linen fronts          <cell>Buut aco ug m&gtilde;a sinina n&gtilde;a ang calauasan n&gtilde;a gapas (coquillo) ug n&gtilde;a hilo ang dughanan
<row><cell lang=en>I wish not the collar very high                 <cell>Dili aco buut n&gtilde;a hata-as caayo ang cuello
<row><cell lang=en>Make me a pair of cuffs                         <cell>Ibuhat aco ug duha ca puño
<row><cell lang=en>Make three piña shirts with silk fronts         <cell>Buhaton mo ug tolo ca sinina n&gtilde;a piña n&gtilde;a may m&gtilde;a dughanan n&gtilde;a seda
<row><cell lang=en>I wish them very loose                          <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a haloag caayo sila
<pb n=327 id=pb327><row><cell lang=en>Make me five flannel shirts for night           <cell>Ibuhat aco ug lima ca sinina n&gtilde;a franela para sa gabi-i
<row><cell lang=en>I wish shirts with the collar and the cuffs apart               <cell>Buut aco ug m&gtilde;a sinina n&gtilde;a may cuello ug m&gtilde;a puño n&gtilde;a binulag
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you charge for half a dozen shirts?                 <cell>Pilay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo sa unum ca sinina?
<row><cell lang=en>Twelve pesos                                    <cell>Napolo ug duha ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>And for a dozen collars?                        <cell>Ug sa usa ca docenas sa m&gtilde;a cuello?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty centavos each                             <cell>Manalapi ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Mark the shirts with these two letters M. C.    <cell>Cifrahi ang m&gtilde;a sinina niining duha ca letra M. C.
<row><cell lang=en>Show me some wool for drawers                   <cell>Ipaquita canaco ug lana n&gtilde;a igacalzoncillos
<row><cell lang=en>I have no wool, if you please there are some kinds of calico    <cell>Uala canaco ug lana, ug buut pa icao ania man ug espartero n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain
<row><cell lang=en>It is the same                                  <cell>Parejo man. Mao ra man
<row><cell lang=en>Measure me for a dozen of drawers               <cell>Patabas aco ug usa ca docenas sa calzoncillos
<row><cell lang=en>I have them cut out                             <cell>Duna man aco m&gtilde;a tinabas na
<row><cell lang=en>So much the better                              <cell>Maayo pa
<row><cell lang=en>Have you undershirts?                           <cell>Na-a ba canimo ug m&gtilde;a camisín?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo
<pb n=328 id=pb328><row><cell lang=en>There are white and black undershirts           <cell>Dunay m&gtilde;a camisín n&gtilde;a maputi ug maitum
<row><cell lang=en>Which of them do you prefer?                    <cell>Onsa ba ang ipalabi mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I prefer these with the front embroidered       <cell>Nahagugma aco niini n&gtilde;a binoldahan ang dughanan
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for a dozen?                <cell>Tagpila man ang docenas?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifteen pesos                                   <cell>Tagpolo ug lima ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>It does not suit me                             <cell>Dili aco muan&gtilde;ay niana
<row><cell lang=en>And what is the cost of a dozen of socks?       <cell>Ug tagpila ba ang docenas sa calcetines?
<row><cell lang=en>What is your number?                            <cell>Onsay número sa cadaco nila?
<row><cell lang=en>My number is ten                                <cell>Ang número n&gtilde;a icapolo
<row><cell lang=en>You must pay eight pesos a dozen                <cell>Baydan mo tagualo ca pisus ang docenas
<row><cell lang=en>Very well                                       <cell>Maayo man
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a pair of gloves                        <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca pares n&gtilde;a guantes
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish these lined with silk?              <cell>Buut ca ba niini n&gtilde;a guihanigan ug seda?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do                                       <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for them?                   <cell>Pilay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo tun&gtilde;ud canila?
<row><cell lang=en>Three pesos                                     <cell>Tolo ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>Can you not reduce the price?                   <cell>Dili ca pahan&gtilde;yo?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot                                        <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>Here is the price                               <cell>Ania man ang bayad
</table>


<pb n=329 id=pb329>
<div1 id=s99>
<head>Paquigpulong sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a hias.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any watches?                           <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a horasan?
<row><cell lang=en>I have some gold and silver watches             <cell>Duna acoy m&gtilde;a horasan n&gtilde;a bulauan ug salapi
<row><cell lang=en>I will buy a gold watch                         <cell>Buut aco mupalit ug usa ca horasan n&gtilde;a bulauan
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic="will not">do not want</corr> this for it is a golden watch      <cell>Dili aco buut niini cay binulauanan man lamang
<row><cell lang=en>What is the price of these rings?               <cell>Pilay vale niining m&gtilde;a singsing?
<row><cell lang=en>They are very dear                              <cell>Mahal caayo sila
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to buy this silver ring?            <cell>Buut ca mupalit niining singsing n&gtilde;a salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>I like it very much, but I have no money        <cell>Mupalit aco unta, apan uala acoy salapi
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want</corr> a gold chain                             <cell>Buut aco ug usa ca cadena n&gtilde;a bulauan
<row><cell lang=en>Is this dear?                                   <cell>Mahal ba quini?
<row><cell lang=en>This is very cheap                              <cell>Barato man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Here are ear-rings, will you buy any of them?                   <cell>Ania man ug m&gtilde;a areos, buut ca mupalit sa uban?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not buy this necklace?               <cell>Mano dili paliton mo quining cuentas?
<row><cell lang=en>Because I have no means                         <cell>Cay uala acoy ipalalit
<pb n=330 id=pb330><row><cell lang=en>It is not true, you are a rich man              <cell>Dili matuod ang pulong mo, salapian ca man
<row><cell lang=en>Do not say it, I am very poor                   <cell>Ayao pagin&gtilde;on niana, pobres man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Excuse me, Sir, I did not intend to molest you                  <cell>Pasaylao aco, Señor, uala acoy tuyo sa pagcasaquit canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Let me go away, good by                         <cell>Papaulia aco usa, ari na aco
<row><cell lang=en>Good by                                         <cell>Adios
</table>


<div1 id=s100>
<head>Paquigpulong sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a libro.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>May I go in<corr>?</corr>                       <cell>Mahimo cong pagsulud?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, come in, what do you want?                 <cell>Oo, dayon, onsay imong quinahanglanon?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to buy some books                        <cell>Mupalit aco unta ug pipila ca libro
<row><cell lang=en>Well, do you wish to see the catalogue?         <cell>Maayo, buut ca ba mubasa sa lista sa m&gtilde;a libro?
<row><cell lang=en>I do, let me see                                <cell>Oo, ipaquita canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you find anything that suits you?            <cell>Hinpalgan mo ba ang iquinahanglan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I found many books that suit me, but as I am seeing they are very dear     <cell>Oo, hinpalgan co ug daghang m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay canaco, apan in&gtilde;on sa acong naquita mahal caayo sila
<row><cell lang=en>No, they are cheap                              <cell>Dili, barato man lagui
<row><cell lang=en>Show me your best English Dictionary            <cell>Ipaquita canaco ang diccionario n&gtilde;a iningles n&gtilde;a labing maayo
<pb n=331 id=pb331><row><cell lang=en>It is out of print, sir                         <cell>Uala na bisan usa ca booc, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any English grammars?                  <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a gramática n&gtilde;a iningles?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have some by several authors             <cell>Oo, may acong pila ca booc sa lain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a magsusulat
<row><cell lang=en>Which is the best?                              <cell>Onsa ba ang labing maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I think this by Mr. M. Rodriguez                <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a quini ni D. M. Rodríguez
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for it?                     <cell>Tagpila ba quini?
<row><cell lang=en>You must pay two dollars                        <cell>Tagurha ca dollar
<row><cell lang=en>Is this the wholesale or the retail price?      <cell>Mao ba cana ang bili sa pagbaliguia mo sa dolodagco cun sa tolotaguidiot?
<row><cell lang=en>I sell by retail                                <cell>Guibaliguia co sa tolotaguidiot
<row><cell lang=en>I think this is very dear                       <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a mahal man caayo quini
<row><cell lang=en>Have you no other cheaper than this?            <cell>Uala na icao ug lain n&gtilde;a barato niini?
<row><cell lang=en>I have no more in my stock                      <cell>Uala acoy lain sa acong almacén
<row><cell lang=en>I do not see any illustrated books              <cell>Dili co maquita ug m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a may estampa
<pb n=332 id=pb332><row><cell lang=en>Here is one just published                      <cell>Ania man dinhi ug usa n&gtilde;a bag-o pa guinimprenta
<row><cell lang=en>Your books are not bound very well              <cell>Ang imong m&gtilde;a libro uala hanigi ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>You have received lately a set of English books                 <cell>Bag-o pa nimo dauata ug daghan m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a iningles
<row><cell lang=en>I should like to see them                       <cell>Buut aco unta muquita canila
<row><cell lang=en>Most willingly, Sir, here they are              <cell>Maayo man, señor, ania man
<row><cell lang=en>Are they all newly-published books?             <cell>Bag-o pa guinimprenta ang tanan?
<row><cell lang=en>No, Sir, some of them are old                   <cell>Dili, Señor, ang uban da-an man
<row><cell lang=en>All right, I will look for some                 <cell>Maayo man, pan&gtilde;itaon co ug pila ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>Well, Sir, have you found anything that suits you?              <cell>Maayo, Señor, hinpalgan mo ba ug bisan onsa n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, here is the list of the books I should like to have        <cell>Oo, ania man ang lista sa m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a paliton co unta
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a Guide-book for the city?             <cell>Duna ba canimo ug usa ca <hi>Guia</hi> sa ciudad<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, here is one                                <cell>Oo, ania man ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Give me the last edition of it                  <cell>Taga-i aco sa olahing pagimprenta niini
<row><cell lang=en>Send these books to my house                    <cell>Ipahatod mo quining m&gtilde;a libro sa amo
<pb n=333 id=pb333><row><cell lang=en>Your orders will be properly executed           <cell>Ang imong m&gtilde;a sugo tutumanon man gayud
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks                                     <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>What philosophical works have you?              <cell>Onsang m&gtilde;a libro sa Filosofía ang ana-a canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>I have none                                     <cell>Uala aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do you like novels?                             <cell>Buut ca ba ug m&gtilde;a novela?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not like that kind of books                <cell>Dili aco mahagugma niang m&gtilde;a libroha
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any history-books for children?        <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a libro sa Historia sa m&gtilde;a bata?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo, duna
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see them                                 <cell>Paquita-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>I want some other books but I will come again next week         <cell>Quinahanglan co ug lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a libro apan mubalic aco dinhi oña sa usang semana
</table>



<div1 id=s101>
<head>Paquigpulong sa usa ca tienda.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you wish to buy?                        <cell>Onsay buut mong paliton?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to buy some articles, may I walk in?     <cell>Guitin&gtilde;uha co ang pagpalit sa ubang m&gtilde;a quinahanglan, mahimo cong paglacatlacat sa sulud?
<row><cell lang=en>You may see around the store                    <cell>Mahimo mong paglibod sa almacén
<pb n=334 id=pb334><row><cell lang=en>What is the price of this hat?                  <cell>Tagpila quining calo?
<row><cell lang=en>There are many kinds of them, please see this beautiful bonnet                  <cell>Dunay daghang calainan nila quitaon mo quining calo sa babaye
<row><cell lang=en>I do not want it                                <cell>Dili aco magaquinahanglan niana
<row><cell lang=en>I will give you this hat for two pesos          <cell>Itogot co canimo quining calo sa duha ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>I am willing to buy some of them                <cell>Buut aco unta mupalit ug pila ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>If you give them to me at one peso each, I will buy a dozen     <cell>Ug itugot mo unta sa mamisus ang usa paliton co ug usa ca docenas
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot                                        <cell>Dili aco macahimo
<row><cell lang=en>You know what to do                             <cell>Icao lamang
<row><cell lang=en>It is impossible for me to deduct anything from the price       <cell>Dili mahimo cong pagpigos sa vale bisan diriot
<row><cell lang=en>Give them to me at one peso and a half each     <cell>Itogot mo sa tagotlo ca salapi ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>I will not                                      <cell>Dili aco buut
<row><cell lang=en>Will you buy any clothes?                       <cell>Buut mong pagpalit ug m&gtilde;a visti?
<row><cell lang=en>I have many kinds of them                       <cell>Ania man sa lain lain n&gtilde;a daguaya
<row><cell lang=en>How much is this white cloth worth?             <cell>Tagpila ba quining visti n&gtilde;a maputi?
<row><cell lang=en>Four pesos and fifty centavos                   <cell>Tagupat ca pisus ug salapi
<pb n=335 id=pb335><row><cell lang=en>It is very dear                                 <cell>Mahal man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>What is the price of sugar?                     <cell>Tagpila ba ang azucar?
<row><cell lang=en>Sugar sells at twenty-five centavos a pound     <cell>Manahate ang libra
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any stuffs?                            <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a panapton?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will give you this one at ten centavos a yard            <cell>Oo, taga-an co icao niini sa manevillana ang yarda
<row><cell lang=en>What is the cost of these stockings?            <cell>Tagpila quining medias?
<row><cell lang=en>Six pesos a dozen                               <cell>Tagunum ca pisus ang docena
<row><cell lang=en>Can you not reduce the price?                   <cell>Dili ca macacubus sa vale?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot                                        <cell>Dili aco macahimo
<row><cell lang=en>It does not suit me to take them at six pesos a dozen           <cell>Dili aco muoyon sa pagbayad sa tagunum ca pisus ang docena
<row><cell lang=en>You sell very dear                              <cell>Mahal caayo ang imong manggad
</table>



<div1 id=s102>
<head><corr sic=Paguigpulong>Paquigpulong</corr> sa usa ca fonda.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you anything to eat?                       <cell>Duna bay imong macaon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have some ham, fish and eggs                  <cell>May acong jamón, isda ug m&gtilde;a itlog
<row><cell lang=en>What wine do you wish?                          <cell>Onsang vinoha ang imnon mo?
<pb n=336 id=pb336><row><cell lang=en>Here is the wine list                           <cell>Ania man ang lista sa m&gtilde;a vino
<row><cell lang=en>I <corr sic=will>want</corr> a bottle of claret                       <cell>Buut aco ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a Burdeos
<row><cell lang=en>Are you fond of valdepeñas?                     <cell>Nahagugma ca sa vinong Valdepeñas<corr>?</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>I am willing to drink a bottle of beer          <cell>Muinom aco unta ug usa ca botella n&gtilde;a cerveza
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish a glass of sherry?                  <cell>Buut ca ba ug usa ca vasong Jerez?
<row><cell lang=en>I wish a cup of champagne                       <cell>Buut aco ug usa ca copa n&gtilde;a champagne
<row><cell lang=en>Uncork that bottle                              <cell>Coha-a ang songsong nianang botella
<row><cell lang=en>Bring a pack of cigarettes                      <cell>Dada diri usa ca caja sa cigarrillos
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see the bill                             <cell>Paquita-a aco sa cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>The champagne is very dear                      <cell>Mahal caayo ang champagne
<row><cell lang=en>Please pick up that cigar                       <cell>Ipolot aco nianang tabaco
<row><cell lang=en>Please pay at the bar                           <cell>Baydan mo ang cuenta sa bar
<row><cell lang=en>The food is very good here                      <cell>Maayo caayo ang pagcaon dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>And not too dear                                <cell>Ug dili mahal caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Not dear? that is not true; I dined yesterday here and I had to pay five pesos                  <cell>Dili mahal? dili matuod cana; cahapon naniodto aco dinhi ug guibayad co ug lima ca pisus
<pb n=337 id=pb337><row><cell lang=en>That is because you have had no experience; do you wish to get anything cheap?                  <cell>Guican cana cay uala icao calibutan; buut ca ba macadan&gtilde;at ug bisan onsa n&gtilde;a barato?
<row><cell lang=en>Indeed                                          <cell>Sa ualay duha duha
<row><cell lang=en>You will see; I invite you to dine with me      <cell>Quitaon mo caron; nagaabi abi aco canimo sa pagpaniodto
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you; I accept                             <cell>Diosmagbayad; buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>Waiter, two three-pesos dinners                 <cell>Bata, duha ca paniodto sa tagotlo ca pisus ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Give us the bill of fare, please                <cell>Ipaquita canamu ang lista sa m&gtilde;a can-on
<row><cell lang=en>Here it is, Sir                                 <cell>Ania man, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>You may have soup, three dishes at your choice, salad and desserts              <cell>Dunay imong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcaon ug sopa, totolo ca calainan sa m&gtilde;a sud-an in&gtilde;on sa pagpili mo, quinilao ug m&gtilde;a postre
<row><cell lang=en>Very well; give us rice soup, fish, chicken, ham and two desserts, cheese and bananas           <cell>Maayo man; taga-i came ug sopa n&gtilde;a bugas, isda, piso, jamón ug duha ca postre, queso ug m&gtilde;a saguing
<row><cell lang=en>All right, Sir                                  <cell>Maayo man, Señor
<row><cell lang=en>Well, what do you think?                        <cell>Nan, onsay guihuna huna mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I think that you are a clever one               <cell>N&gtilde;a icao man usa ca tao n&gtilde;a masinabuton
<pb n=338 id=pb338><row><cell lang=en>Will you take coffee?                           <cell>Buut ca ba ug café?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I never take it in the noon                 <cell>Dili, uala acoy batasan sa paginom niana sa modto
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to smoke?                           <cell>Buut ca ba magtabaco?
<row><cell lang=en>No, I have given up smoking                     <cell>Dili, guibia-an co na ang pagtabaco
<row><cell lang=en>But you must take something                     <cell>Bisan pa niana, quinahanglan gayud n&gtilde;a dauaton mo ug bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>Will you have liquor?                           <cell>Buut ca ba ug licor?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will                                     <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>What do you prefer?                             <cell>Onsay iinom mo unta?
<row><cell lang=en>Ask for a cup of cognac                         <cell>Pan&gtilde;ayoon mo ug usa ca copa n&gtilde;a coñac
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks for your kindness                   <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa imong calooy
<row><cell lang=en>We must part; I have to return home             <cell>Magbulag na quita; pauli aco usa sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, good by                              <cell>Maayo man, adios
</table>




<div1 id=s103>
<head>Paquigpulong sa usa ca hotel.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any rooms vacant?                      <cell>Duna bay imong m&gtilde;a cuarto n&gtilde;a ialabang?
<row><cell lang=en>How many shall you require?                     <cell>Pilay imong quinahanglanon?
<row><cell lang=en>Two single-bedded                               <cell>Duruha n&gtilde;a may tagsa ca higda-an
<pb n=339 id=pb339><row><cell lang=en>I can give you two adjoining ones               <cell>Aban&gtilde;an co icao ug duha ca booc n&gtilde;a nahanayon
<row><cell lang=en>It will suit us quite as well                   <cell>Mao da man canamu
<row><cell lang=en>Will you stay here some time?                   <cell>Madugay ba camo dinhi?
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps we shall be here for three months       <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali magpuyo came dinhi totolo ca bulan
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for a month?                <cell>Tagpila ang pan&gtilde;ayoon mo sa usa ca bulan?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty pesos a month                             <cell>Tagcalim-an ca pisus ang bulan
<row><cell lang=en>Give me the key to the room                     <cell>Taga-i aco sa llave sa cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>The rooms are engaged for next month            <cell>Guihan&gtilde;yo na ang m&gtilde;a cuarto sa bulan n&gtilde;a umabut
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the bell to this room?                 <cell>Hain ba ang talaogan niining cuarto?
<row><cell lang=en>Here it is                                      <cell>Ania man
<row><cell lang=en>At what hour do we dine?                        <cell>Onsang horasa igpalaniodto namu?
<row><cell lang=en>At twelve o&apos;clock                               <cell>Sa a las doce
<row><cell lang=en>Can we have our dinner served in our rooms?     <cell>Mahimo mong pagdolot canamo sa paniodto sa among m&gtilde;a cuarto?
<row><cell lang=en>You have to pay extra                           <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a macadugang camo sa bayad
<row><cell lang=en>Have my luggage brought up                      <cell>Ipasaca mo ang acong casangcapan
<pb n=340 id=pb340><row><cell lang=en>Have you any baths in the house?                <cell>Duna bay m&gtilde;a caligo-an sa balay?
<row><cell lang=en>I have                                          <cell>Duna man
<row><cell lang=en>Where is the water-closet?                     <cell>Hain ba ang caliban&gtilde;an?
<row><cell lang=en>There is it at the corner of this passage       <cell>Tua sa pandugo niining taytayan
<row><cell lang=en>Have you other apartments to let?               <cell>Na-a ba canimo ug laing m&gtilde;a sulud n&gtilde;a ialabang?
<row><cell lang=en>I have only one                                 <cell>May aco ug usa ca booc da
<row><cell lang=en>Will you allow me to see it?                    <cell>Paquitaon ba aco nimo niana?
<row><cell lang=en>With the greatest pleasure                      <cell>Sa maayong cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>This is very large                              <cell>Dacoan man caayo quini
<row><cell lang=en>It will do for me                               <cell>Quini muan&gtilde;ay man canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Does this room look into the street?            <cell>Atbang ba quining cuarto sa dalan?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is a front room                         <cell>Oo, mao usa ca cuarto sa atuban&gtilde;an sa balay
<row><cell lang=en>Have you many boarders?                         <cell>Ania ba dinhi ug daghang m&gtilde;a dumulo-ong?
<row><cell lang=en>I have not many                                 <cell>Dili daghan
</table>



<div1 id=s104>
<head>Paquigpulong sa usa ca Banco.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I have to do <corr>business </corr>at the Bank                    <cell><corr sic=Danay>Dunay</corr> acong bubuhaton sa Banco
<pb n=341 id=pb341><row><cell lang=en>I will accompany you                            <cell>Muuban aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Have you any business there?                    <cell>Duna bay imong buhaton didto?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to change my gold                        <cell>Dunay acong pailisan ang bulauan co
<row><cell lang=en>What is the premium now?                        <cell>Pila ba ang pagcacapin caron?
<row><cell lang=en>Perhaps twenty per cent                         <cell>Tin&gtilde;ali caloha-an sa usa ca gatus
<row><cell lang=en>Gold is very low to-day                         <cell>Diriot man caron adlao ang bili sa bulauan
<row><cell lang=en>I have to draw a draft against Mr. N. Gutierrez                 <cell>Dunay acong paliton ug usa ca letra n&gtilde;a igabayad ni D. N. Gutiérrez
<row><cell lang=en>Here is the Bank                                <cell>Ania man ang Banco
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a draft on Madrid for the amount of five thousand dollars at sixty days after sight     <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca letra sa Madrid sa cantidad sa lima ca libo ca dollar n&gtilde;a balaydon sa icacanuman ca adlao cutub sa pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>Against whom will you draw?                     <cell>Quinsa magabayad nianang salapi didto?
<row><cell lang=en>Against Mr. J. Salas to order of Mr. M. Garcia                  <cell>Si D. J. Salas maoy magabayad niana can D. M. García
<row><cell lang=en>What will be the discount?                      <cell>Pila ba ang colohaon sa tagsa ca gatus?
<row><cell lang=en>Forty-five per cent                             <cell>Tagcapatan ug lima sa tagsa ca gatus
<pb n=342 id=pb342><row><cell lang=en>Are you the paying-teller of the Bank?          <cell>Icao ba <corr sic=aug>ang</corr> tigpamayad sa Banco?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, it is I                                    <cell>Oo, aco man
<row><cell lang=en>I am the bearer of this bill                    <cell>Aco man ang magdadala niining letra
<row><cell lang=en>Payable at sight                                <cell>Balaydon dayon sa pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>Payable fifteen days&apos; sight                     <cell>Balaydon sa icapolo ug lima ca adlao cutub sa pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot accept it                              <cell>Dili aco macadauat niana
<row><cell lang=en>Will you change these notes?                    <cell>Buut mong pagbaylo niining m&gtilde;a billete?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I will                                     <cell>Oo, buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>This note is a counterfeit                      <cell>Quining billete falso man <hi>cun</hi> ualay pulus
<row><cell lang=en>Let me look at it                               <cell>Paquita-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>Can you cash me this check?                     <cell>Mahimo mong pagbayad canaco niining cheque?
<row><cell lang=en><corr sic=Dou>Do</corr> you want it in currency?                <cell>Buut mo ang pagbayad sa m&gtilde;a billete?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes                                             <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Put a stamp on it                               <cell>Ibutang mo usa ca sello diha niana
<row><cell lang=en>Give me a draft                                 <cell>Taga-i aco ug usa ca letra
<row><cell lang=en>In favor of whom will you draw?                 <cell>Quinsay imong padauaton sa salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>In favor of Mr. D. Zamora                       <cell>Si D. D. Zamora
<row><cell lang=en>Can you give me change for a hundred pesos bank-note?           <cell>Muilis ca ba niining billete sa usa ca gatus ca pisus?
<pb n=343 id=pb343><row><cell lang=en>I can, here is the change                       <cell>Oo, ania man ang pagilis
<row><cell lang=en>They are silver coins                           <cell>Salapi man ang ilis
<row><cell lang=en>Are they all good?                              <cell>Maayo ba quining salapia?
<row><cell lang=en>I think they are                                <cell>Maayo man daguay
<row><cell lang=en>You may examine them                            <cell>Susiha cun maayo ba ang tanang m&gtilde;a moneda
<row><cell lang=en>Is this peso good?                              <cell>Maayo ba quining pisus?
<row><cell lang=en>Let me see                                      <cell>Paquita-a aco
<row><cell lang=en>Ring it                                         <cell>Tingga sia
<row><cell lang=en>It does not ring sharp                          <cell>Dili maayo ang tin&gtilde;ug nia
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is bad                               <cell>Nagahuna huna aco n&gtilde;a dili maayo sia
<row><cell lang=en>Here is another                                 <cell>Ania man ug lain
</table>



<div1 id=s105>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagabang sa usa ca sologo-on.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Here is a servant                               <cell>Ania man ang usa ca sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>Do you want a servant?                          <cell>Quinahanglan mo ba ang usa ca sologo-on?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I do                                       <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>Here I am                                       <cell>Ania man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you understand cooking?                      <cell>Mahibalo ca sa pagcocinero?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I understand a little                      <cell>Oo, mahibalo aco ug diotay
<pb n=344 id=pb344><row><cell lang=en>Do you understand to serve at table?            <cell>Mahibalo ca sa pagdolot sa lamesa?
<row><cell lang=en>I do                                            <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>What do you ask for wages?                      <cell>Pila ang sohol n&gtilde;a imong pan&gtilde;ayoon?
<row><cell lang=en>Ten pesos a month                               <cell>Tagpolo ca pisus ang bulan
<row><cell lang=en>That is a great deal                            <cell>Labihan man cana
<row><cell lang=en>Never mind, I engage you                        <cell>Ualay sapayan, dauaton ta icao
<row><cell lang=en>When must I come?                               <cell>Anosa muanhi aco?
<row><cell lang=en>Early in the morning                            <cell>Ugma sa caadlaon
<row><cell lang=en>Good by, till to-morrow                         <cell>Adios, hasta sa ugma
<row><cell lang=en>Here is the new servant                         <cell>Ania man ang bag-ong sologo-on
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to come in                             <cell>Pasudlon mo sia
<row><cell lang=en>Good morning, Madam, how do you do?             <cell>Maayong buntag, Señora, comusta ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Very well, thank you                            <cell>Maayo man, diosmagbayad
<row><cell lang=en>Here I am at your service                       <cell>Ania man aco ug dunay sugo
<row><cell lang=en>Well, ask for instructions to the steward       <cell>Pan&gtilde;ayoon mo ug sugo sa mayordomo
<row><cell lang=en>In whose service have you been until now?       <cell>Quinsay guisilvihan mo cutub caron?
<row><cell lang=en>I was in president&apos;s house                      <cell>Diha aco sa balay sa presidente
<row><cell lang=en>All right, do not go out this evening           <cell>Maayo man, ayao ca pagcanaog caron hapon
<pb n=345 id=pb345><row><cell lang=en>Keep the key of my room                         <cell>Bantayan mo ang llave sa acong cuarto
<row><cell lang=en>Do not open the door to any one                 <cell>Ayao pasudla ug bisan quinsa
<row><cell lang=en>Go for a walk and return at five o&apos;clock        <cell>Magsodoy sodoy ca ug bumalic ca sa a las cinco
<row><cell lang=en>Light the lamps                                 <cell>Dagcuti ang m&gtilde;a quinqué
<row><cell lang=en>Put petroleum in the lamps                      <cell>Tibli ang m&gtilde;a quinqué
<row><cell lang=en>You are very awkward                            <cell>Cabus man caayo icao
<row><cell lang=en>I shall have to dismiss you                     <cell>Malugus aco magpapahaua canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am not satisfied with your services           <cell>Dili magaoyon aco sa imong pagsilve
<row><cell lang=en>How much do I owe you?                          <cell>Pila ba ang nautang co canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>You must give me ten pesos                      <cell>Taga-i aco unta ug napolo ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>I will not give you more than five pesos        <cell>Dili co ihatag canimo ug capin sa lima ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>The servants are the <corr sic=most>worst</corr> enemies of their masters       <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a sologo-on mao ang m&gtilde;a labing daco n&gtilde;a caauay sa m&gtilde;a agalon
</table>



<div1 id=s106>
<head>Paquigpulong sa pagabang sa usa ca carruage.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where are <corr sic=gou>you</corr> going?       <cell>Asa ca pain&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>I am going to the sea-shore, will you come with me?            <cell>Pain&gtilde;on aco sa baybayon, buut ca ba muuban canaco?
<pb n=346 id=pb346><row><cell lang=en>Yes, I am at your service                       <cell>Oo, icao ang magabuut
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks, let us take a cab                  <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo, magabang quita ug usa ca carruage
<row><cell lang=en>All right, the sea-shore is very far from here                  <cell>Maayo man, ang baybayon halayo caayo cutub dinhi
<row><cell lang=en>Conductor, how much must I pay you an hour?     <cell>Cochero, pilay imong pan&gtilde;ayoon sa usa ca horas?
<row><cell lang=en>One peso                                        <cell>Mamisus ang horas
<row><cell lang=en>Well, drive us to the sea-shore                 <cell>Maayo, dada came sa bactason
<row><cell lang=en>How long will it take to drive us there?        <cell>Pila ca horas magdugay quita sa pagabut didto?
<row><cell lang=en>Two hours                                       <cell>Duha ca horas
<row><cell lang=en>Let us down at this house; stop here and wait   <cell>Hapita quining balay; muhunung ca ug maghulat
<row><cell lang=en>Here we are again, go on                        <cell>Ania na man came pagusab, padayon
<row><cell lang=en>What street is this?                            <cell>Onsa ba quining dalana?
<row><cell lang=en>This is the Magallanes-street                   <cell>Quini mao ang dalan sa Magallanes
<row><cell lang=en>Stop at the next corner                         <cell>Humunung ca sa nahaunang esquina
<row><cell lang=en>Does this cab cross the Rizal-square?           <cell>Muagui ba quita sa Plaza-Rizal?
<row><cell lang=en>No, because this street is blockaded            <cell>Dili, cay dunay cabilinggan niining dalan
<pb n=347 id=pb347><row><cell lang=en>Conductor, close the blinds                     <cell>Cochero, sirhan mo ang m&gtilde;a cortina
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you stop?                                <cell>N&gtilde;ano mihunung ca?
<row><cell lang=en>Because there is a car                          <cell>Cay ana-a diha ug usa ca carretón
<row><cell lang=en>How much do I owe you?                          <cell>Pila ang ibayad co canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>One peso and a half                             <cell>Tolo ca salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Have you a printed tariff?                      <cell>Na-a ba canimo ug usa ca arancel n&gtilde;a guinimprenta?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, here it is                                 <cell>Oo, ania man
<row><cell lang=en>Take your money                                 <cell>Dauata ang bayad
<row><cell lang=en>Keep the change                                 <cell>Imo ang sobra
</table>



<div1 id=s107>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagpatigayon, pagpalit, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Where has my servant been?                      <cell>Sa onsa ang acong sologo-on?
<row><cell lang=en>He has been in the kitchen                      <cell>Didto sia sa cocina
<row><cell lang=en>Has he not been to market?                      <cell>Uala ba sia sa tianggi?
<row><cell lang=en>He has not yet                                  <cell>Uala pa
<row><cell lang=en>Send him to the market                          <cell>Paadtoon mo sia sa tianggi
<row><cell lang=en>What have you to do this evening?               <cell>Onsa may bubuhaton mo caron hapon?
<row><cell lang=en>I have to go to market also                     <cell>May acong adtoon usab sa tianggi
<pb n=348 id=pb348><row><cell lang=en>At what o&apos;clock do you intend to go?            <cell>Onsa n&gtilde;a horas iadto mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not intend to go very early                <cell>Dili aco maghuna huna muadto sa hapon pa caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to buy this horse?                  <cell>Buut ca ba mupalit niining cabayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not for he is very dear                    <cell>Dili aco cay mahal caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Will you buy that coach?                        <cell>Buut mong pagpalit nianang carruage?
<row><cell lang=en>No, because I have no money                     <cell>Dili cay uala co ipalalit
<row><cell lang=en>It is very cheap                                <cell>Barato man caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Never mind                                      <cell>Ualay sapayan. Bisan
<row><cell lang=en>Does it suit you to sell on credit?             <cell>Muan&gtilde;ay ba canimo ang pagbaliguia sa inutang?
<row><cell lang=en>I sell only for cash                            <cell>Dili co ibaliguia cun dili baydan
<row><cell lang=en>Has your uncle brought me the handkerchiefs he promised me?     <cell>Guidad-an ba aco sa oyoan mo sa m&gtilde;a paño n&gtilde;a sinaad canaco?
<row><cell lang=en>He did not bring them to you, for there were none at his departure              <cell>Uala, cay ualay m&gtilde;a paño sa iyang pagguican
<row><cell lang=en>Did you pay for the books you bought this morning?              <cell>Guibaydan mo na ang m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a pinalit mo ganina sa buntag?
<row><cell lang=en>No, for I had no money enough                   <cell>Uala, cay uala acoy salapi n&gtilde;a igo
<pb n=349 id=pb349><row><cell lang=en>Have you purchased anything to-day?             <cell>Guipalit mo ba ug bisan onsa caron adlaua?
<row><cell lang=en>I have purchased some things                    <cell>Guipalit co ug pila ca butang
<row><cell lang=en>How much did you sell to-day?                   <cell>Pilay guihalin mo caron adlao?
<row><cell lang=en>I did a little                                  <cell>Diriot da. Diotay da
<row><cell lang=en>I shall buy some chickens                       <cell>Paliton co ug pila ca piso
<row><cell lang=en>Buy a pair of ducks                             <cell>Palita ug duha ca itic
<row><cell lang=en>There is a couple of nice ducks                 <cell>Ania man ug duha ca itic n&gtilde;a maayo
<row><cell lang=en>How much do you ask for them?                   <cell>Pilay pan&gtilde;ayoon mo tun&gtilde;ud canila?
<row><cell lang=en>Seventy-five cents each                         <cell>Tagotlo ca cahate ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>Have you fresh eggs?                            <cell>Ana-a ba canimo ug m&gtilde;a itlog n&gtilde;a bag-o?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I have                                     <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>How many will you give to me for one peso?      <cell>Pilay ihatag mo canaco sa usa ca pisus?
<row><cell lang=en>Forty ones                                      <cell>Capatan ca booc
<row><cell lang=en>They are very dear                              <cell>Mahal man caayo sila
<row><cell lang=en>I want some lard                                <cell>Quinahanglan co ug manteca
<row><cell lang=en>How many pounds of it do you want?              <cell>Pila ca libra imong quinahanglanon?
<row><cell lang=en>Two pounds only                                 <cell>Duha ca libra da
<row><cell lang=en>Mary, you will finish marketing                 <cell>María, icao macatapus sa m&gtilde;a palaliton
<row><cell lang=en>Take three pounds of sugar if it is good        <cell>Ug maayo ang azucar paliton mo totolo ca libra
<pb n=350 id=pb350><row><cell lang=en>Take four pounds of coffee also if it is not dear               <cell>Palita usab ug upat ca libra n&gtilde;a café cun dili mahal ogaling
<row><cell lang=en>As you come back call at the butcher&apos;s          <cell>Sa pagpauli mo hapita ang baliguia-an sa carne
<row><cell lang=en>What meat shall I order?                        <cell>Onsang carne ang ipahatod co?
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to send two or three ribs of beef to-day               <cell>Caron adlao ipahatod mo duha cun tolo ba ca gosoc sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>For to-morrow a leg of mutton                   <cell>Ugma usa ca pa-a sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>I should like to have a breast of veal          <cell>Muambit aco unta sa usa ca dughan sa vacang dumalaga
<row><cell lang=en>Do not forget a quarter of lamb                 <cell>Dili hicalimtan mo ang usa ca bahin sa itoy sa carnero
<row><cell lang=en>See whether he has got a nice ox tongue         <cell>Susihon mo cun ana-a ba cania usa ca dila n&gtilde;a maayo sa vaca
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to send all this at once               <cell>Padadon mo sia sa n&gtilde;atanan caron caron
<row><cell lang=en>Tell him to send the bill with it               <cell>Ipahatod mo cania ang cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish me to buy any fish?                 <cell>Paliton co ba usab ug isda?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I forgot to mention it                     <cell>Oo, hincalimtan co ang pagsugo canimo niana
<pb n=351 id=pb351><row><cell lang=en>Is there any fish in the market?                <cell>Duna bay isda sa tianggi?
<row><cell lang=en>There is plenty of it                           <cell>Duna man ug daghan caayo
<row><cell lang=en>There is hardly some fish                       <cell>Diriot da ang m&gtilde;a isda. Lugus macaplag ug isda
<row><cell lang=en>Buy also a hen                                  <cell>Paliton mo usab ug usa ca himun&gtilde;a-an
<row><cell lang=en>Will you sell me your sister&apos;s ring?            <cell>Buut mong pagbaliguia canaco sa singsing sa imong igso-on?
<row><cell lang=en>I will not for it is not mine                   <cell>Dili aco buut cay dili man áco cana
<row><cell lang=en>I will sell you my father&apos;s watch               <cell>Buut aco unta magbaliguia canimo sa horasan sa acong amahan
<row><cell lang=en>I will not buy it for you have robbed it, I am sure             <cell>Dili aco buut mupalit niana cay guicauat mo cana sa uala ing duha duha
<row><cell lang=en>Have you sold all the sugar?                    <cell>Guihudut mo ba ang paghalin sa azucar?
<row><cell lang=en>I have sold all of it                           <cell>Guihudut co na ang paghalin niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do you wish to buy flour?                       <cell>Buut ca ba mupalit ug harina?
<row><cell lang=en>I do                                            <cell>Buut aco
<row><cell lang=en>Do you need all this flour?                     <cell>Quinahanglan mo ba quining tanan n&gtilde;a harina?
<row><cell lang=en>Yes, I need                                     <cell>Oo, quinahanglan co
<pb n=352 id=pb352><row><cell lang=en>How much did you pay for the glasses?           <cell>Tagpila ang pagbayad mo sa m&gtilde;a vaso?
<row><cell lang=en>I paid thirty-seven cents and a half each       <cell>Tagotlo ca sicapat ang usa
<row><cell lang=en>How much did you pay for this house?            <cell>Pila ba ang bayad mo tun&gtilde;ud niining balay?
<row><cell lang=en>Five hundred dollars                            <cell>Lima ca gatus ca dollar
<row><cell lang=en>What is the price of this?                      <cell>Pilay vale niini?
<row><cell lang=en>We have some of all prices                      <cell>Dinhi man canamu sa nagcalain lain n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a vale
<row><cell lang=en>Show me the best you have                       <cell>Ipaquita canaco ang labing maayo n&gtilde;a na-a canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Is this the finest you have?                    <cell>Mao ba quini ang labing maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I find it very dear                             <cell>Sa acong paminao mahal caayo cana
<row><cell lang=en>I have but one price                            <cell>Dili aco magabalhin sa vale
<row><cell lang=en>Can you let me have for less?                   <cell>Dili mo itogot canaco sa diotay pa n&gtilde;a vale?
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot sell it for less                       <cell>Dili aco macahimo sa pagcacobos sa vale niana
<row><cell lang=en>Your bill is very moderate                      <cell>Casaran&gtilde;an man lamang ang imong cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>You made a mistake in the amount                <cell>Nasayop ca sa pagsuma
<row><cell lang=en>I will settle it to-morrow                      <cell>Baydan co icao ugma
</table>


<pb n=353 id=pb353>
<div1 id=s108>
<head>Lain laing m&gtilde;a sugo sa pagpalit, pagbaliguia, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Enclosed you will find memorandum for sundry articles           <cell>Ania man guiapil co ug usa ca lista sa m&gtilde;a palaliton n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain
<row><cell lang=en>The goods shall be forwarded without loss of time               <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a butang n&gtilde;a guipalit mo ipahatod canimo sa labing madali
<row><cell lang=en>The goods must be delivered with the least possible delay       <cell>Itocnol unta ang m&gtilde;a efectos sa labing madali
<row><cell lang=en>The articles are in readiness                   <cell>Guiandam na man ang m&gtilde;a manggad
<row><cell lang=en>By a safe opportunity                           <cell>Sa usa ca pagagui n&gtilde;a saliganan
<row><cell lang=en>We will punctually follow your direction        <cell>Tumanon namu sa hingpit ang sugo mo
<row><cell lang=en>In the manner you judge best                    <cell>Sa pagagui n&gtilde;a, sa pagsabut niño, mao ang labing maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Your order is in execution                      <cell>Hingpiton pa ang lista sa m&gtilde;a guitugom mo
<row><cell lang=en>To oblige a friend to whom I could not deny this favor          <cell>Tun&gtilde;ud sa pagbalos co sa usa ca higala n&gtilde;a buut cong silvihan
<row><cell lang=en>As you may deem most to my advantage            <cell>Sa usa ca pagcaoyon n&gtilde;a labing macapulus unta ca acong pohonan
<pb n=354 id=pb354><row><cell lang=en>The utmost attention will be paid to your order                 <cell>Tumanon namu sa dacong cacugui ang m&gtilde;a sugo mo
<row><cell lang=en>Hold them until further orders                  <cell>Hauid-an mo cana hasta sa laing sugo
<row><cell lang=en>As soon as practicable                          <cell>Sa labing madali in&gtilde;on sa mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>As far as practicable                           <cell>Ta man sa macaabut
<row><cell lang=en>Consider the order null and <corr sic=avoid>void</corr>         <cell>Uala nay pulus ang sugo co
<row><cell lang=en>Consider my order in full force                 <cell>Uala co mabalhin ang acong sugo
<row><cell lang=en>The best shall be done                          <cell>Tumanon namu cana in&gtilde;on sa mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>I have to countermand that order                <cell>Dili na aco mahanayon sa pagpalit
<row><cell lang=en>I hope this will meet your approbation          <cell>Milaom aco n&gtilde;a muoyon ca sa amung buhat
<row><cell lang=en>At this last rate I have closed the bargain     <cell>Guioyonan co na niining olahing bili
<row><cell lang=en>I have not had an offer of any kind             <cell>Uala co maquita pa ug bisan quinsa n&gtilde;a mahagugma mupalit
<row><cell lang=en>To avoid any loss accruing to you               <cell>Cay aron dili ca unta magpildi
<row><cell lang=en>There was not a single bid for it               <cell>Uala mutungha ug bisan quinsa sa pagpalit
<row><cell lang=en>We had no offer <corr sic=whatever>whatsoever</corr> for them             <cell>Ualay bisan quinsa muanha sa pagpalit
<row><cell lang=en>Which we place to your credit                   <cell>N&gtilde;a guitin&gtilde;ub namo sa imong pohonan
<pb n=355 id=pb355><row><cell lang=en>Your draft must remain in sufferance            <cell>Ang imong letra dili pabaydon
<row><cell lang=en>It was paid on presentation                     <cell>Guibayad namo dayon sa pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>We decline to accept it                         <cell>Dili came muoyon sa pagdauat niana
<row><cell lang=en>I beg to recommend my drafts to your protection                 <cell>Ipan&gtilde;amuyo co canimo n&gtilde;a paglabanan mo unta ang acong m&gtilde;a letra
<row><cell lang=en>I have drawn on you at 60 days&apos; sight           <cell>Guipahatod co canimo ug usa ca letra n&gtilde;a pagbaydon canimo sa icacanuman ca adlao cutub sa nahaunang pagquita
<row><cell lang=en>I have withheld my acceptance                   <cell>Nadugay aco sa pagoyon niana
<row><cell lang=en>The expenses are placed to your credit          <cell>Ang m&gtilde;a gasto guibutang namu sa imong cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>You are not entitled to a commission            <cell>Uala icao ug catun&gtilde;ud sa pagdauat ug bisan onsa tun&gtilde;ud sa pagtuman mo nianang togom
<row><cell lang=en>Please correct the error pointed out to you     <cell>Cohaon mo ang sayop n&gtilde;a guintodlo co canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I find I am not credited for this sum           <cell>Uala co maquita canang cantidad inapil sa acong pohonan
<pb n=356 id=pb356><row><cell lang=en>If found correct, please to enter accordingly                   <cell>Cun uala unta sayop, isulat mo cana in&gtilde;on sa pagcaoyon
<row><cell lang=en>We have not yet had leisure to examine the accounts             <cell>Uala pa came ug tiempo sa pagsusi sa m&gtilde;a cuenta
<row><cell lang=en>To the debit of your account                    <cell>Guitin&gtilde;ub na sa imong utang
<row><cell lang=en>We hand you account of sales of the goods       <cell>Guiapil namu ang lista sa m&gtilde;a manggad n&gtilde;a guibaliguia
</table>



<div1 id=s109>
<head>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud sa pagisip sa salapi.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Let us speak of money                           <cell>Magsulti quita sa salapi
<row><cell lang=en>Do you know how to count it?                    <cell>Mantigo ca sa pagisip niana?
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know very well for I cannot understand the difference between the American and Philippine money        <cell>Dili aco mantigo caayo cay dili macasabut aco sa calainan sa salapi n&gtilde;a americano sa filipino
<row><cell lang=en>I will teach you a little about the American coins, their value and their exchange for the Conant coins         <cell>Todloan co icao ug diotay sa tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a moneda americana, sa ilang bili ug sa pagcailis canila sa salapi n&gtilde;a Conant
<row><cell lang=en>Ten American cents make one dime, ten dimes one dollar, ten dollars one eagle                   <cell>Napolo ca céntimo n&gtilde;a americano nahimo ug usa ca <hi>dime</hi>, napolo ca <hi>dime</hi> ug usa ca <hi>dollar</hi> ug napolo ca <hi>dollar</hi> ug usa ca <hi>águila</hi>
<pb n=357 id=pb357><row><cell lang=en>How many cents are there in one quarter dollar?                 <cell>Pila ca céntimo ang ana-a sa usa ca <hi>quarter dollar</hi>?
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty-five cents                               <cell>Caloha-an ug lima
<row><cell lang=en>How many cents are there in one half-dollar?    <cell>Pila ca céntimo ang ana-a sa usa ca <hi>half-dollar</hi>?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty cents                                     <cell>Calim-an ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>How many dollars in one double eagle?           <cell>Pila ca <hi>dollar</hi> sa usa ca doble águila?
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty dollars                                  <cell>Caloha-an ca <hi>dollar</hi>
<row><cell lang=en>How many cents in one dollar?                   <cell>Pila ca céntimo sa usa ca <hi>dollar</hi>?
<row><cell lang=en>One hundred cents                               <cell>Usa ca gatus ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>How many dollars in one eagle?                  <cell>Pila ca <hi>dollar</hi> sa usa ca águila?
<row><cell lang=en>Ten dollars                                     <cell>Napolo ca <hi>dollar</hi>
<row><cell lang=en>How many cents in one nickel?                   <cell>Pila ca céntimo sa usa ca nikel?
<row><cell lang=en>Five cents                                      <cell>Lima ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>Ten centavos make one <hi>sevillana</hi> or <hi>díez y seis</hi>, twenty centavos one <hi>peseta</hi>, five <hi>sevillanas</hi> one <hi>salapi</hi>, five <hi>pesetas</hi> one <hi>peso</hi> and two <hi>salapis</hi> one <hi>peso</hi> also<note n=1 lang=ceb>Guin&gtilde;anlan co n&gtilde;a sevillana ang moneda Conant sa tagpolo ca centavo, peseta ang sa tagcaloha-an ca centavo, ug salapi ang sa tagcalim-an ca centavo cay caron sa pagsunud lang sa batasan sa m&gtilde;a tao sa paghatag sa m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan n&gtilde;a naasuy sa m&gtilde;a bag-ong moneda n&gtilde;a nanigin&gtilde;on sa m&gtilde;a da-an.</note>                 <cell>Napolo ca centavo mahimo ug usa ca sevillana cun diez y seis, caloha-an ca centavo ug usa ca peseta, lima ca sevillana ug usa ca salapi, lima ca peseta ug usa ca pisus ug duha ca salapi ug usa ca pisus usab
<pb n=358 id=pb358><row><cell lang=en>How many centavos are there in one Conant nickel?               <cell>Pila ca centavo ana-a sa usa ca <hi>nikel</hi> n&gtilde;a Conant?
<row><cell lang=en>Five centavos                                   <cell>Lima ca centavo
<row><cell lang=en>How many centavos in one <hi>salapi</hi>?       <cell>Pila ca centavo sa usa ca salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty centavos                                  <cell>Calim-an ca centavo
<row><cell lang=en>Six centavos and two eighths make one <hi>sicaualo</hi>, two <hi>sicaualos</hi> one <hi>sicapat</hi>, two <hi>cahates</hi> one <hi>salapi</hi> and two <hi>salapis</hi> one <hi>peso</hi>       <cell>Unum ca centavo ug duha ca icaualong bahin mahimo ug usa ca sicaualo, duha ca sicaualo ug usa ca sicapat, duha ca cahate ug usa ca salapi ug duha ca salapi ug usa ca pisus
<row><cell lang=en>How many <hi>sicapats</hi> are there in one peso?               <cell>Pila ca sicapat ang ana-a sa usa ca pisus?
<row><cell lang=en>Eight <hi>sicapats</hi>                         <cell>Ualo ca sicapat
<row><cell lang=en>How many <hi>sicapats</hi> in one <hi>cahate</hi>?              <cell>Pila ca sicapat sa usa ca cahate?
<row><cell lang=en>Two <hi>sicapats</hi>                           <cell>Duha ca sicapat
<row><cell lang=en>One peso has one hundred centavos, one <hi>salapi</hi> fifty centavos, one <hi>cahate</hi> twenty-five centavos and one <hi>sicapat</hi> twelve centavos and a half             <cell>Usa ca pisus duna usa ca gatus ca centavo, usa ca salapi calim-an ca centavo, usa ca cahate caloha-an ug lima ca centavo ug usa ca sicapat napolo ug duha ca centavo ug tun&gtilde;a
<pb n=359 id=pb359><row><cell lang=en>How many American cents are there in one peso Conant?           <cell>Pila ca céntimos n&gtilde;a americano ang ana-a sa usa ca pisus Conant?
<row><cell lang=en>Fifty cents<note n=1 lang=ceb>Quinahanglang n&gtilde;a pagatiman-an caayo sa magbabasa n&gtilde;a ang salapi n&gtilde;a americano vale ug doble sa salapi n&gtilde;a filipino, ug usahay capin n&gtilde;ani sa doble in&gtilde;on sa m&gtilde;a balaod sa m&gtilde;a ponoan.</note>    <cell>Calim-an ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>How many American cents are there in one <hi>salapi</hi> Conant?                <cell>Pila ca céntimo n&gtilde;a americano ang ana-a sa usa ca salapi Conant?
<row><cell lang=en>Twenty-five cents                               <cell>Caloha-an ug lima ca céntimo
<row><cell lang=en>How many American cents are there in one <hi>cahate</hi> Conant?                <cell>Pila ca céntimo n&gtilde;a americano ang ana-a sa usa ca cahate Conant?
<row><cell lang=en>Twelve cents and a half                         <cell>Napolo ug duha ca céntimo ug tun&gtilde;a
<row><cell lang=en>One American nickel makes one <hi>diez y seis</hi> Conant       <cell>Usa ca <hi>nikel</hi> n&gtilde;a americano mao da man sa usa ca diez y seis Conant
<pb n=360 id=pb360><row><cell lang=en>One American dime makes one <hi>peseta</hi> Conant              <cell>Usa ca <hi><corr sic="díme">dime</corr></hi> n&gtilde;a americano mao da man sa usa ca peseta Conant
<row><cell lang=en>Five American dimes make one peso Conant        <cell>Lima ca <hi>dime</hi> n&gtilde;a americano mahimo ug usa ca pisus Conant
<row><cell lang=en>Five American nickels make one <hi>salapi</hi> Conant           <cell>Lima ca <hi>nikel</hi> n&gtilde;a americano mahimo ug usa ca salapi Conant
</table>



<pb n=361 id=pb361>
<div1 id=s110>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa caligutgut, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What a shame!                                   <cell>Pagcaulao niana!
<row><cell lang=en>Are you not ashamed?                            <cell>Dili ca maulao?
<row><cell lang=en>How could you do so?                            <cell>Guionsa mo ang pagcahimo sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>You ought to be ashamed                         <cell>Maulao ca unta
<row><cell lang=en>How dare you do so?                             <cell>N&gtilde;ano nan&gtilde;ahas ca sa pagbuhat sa in&gtilde;on?
<row><cell lang=en>Can&apos;t you be quiet?                             <cell>Di ca macapuyo?
<row><cell lang=en>Clear out                                       <cell>Pahaua diha
<row><cell lang=en>Get out of my sight                             <cell>Pahalayo ca sa acong pagtanao
<row><cell lang=en>I am in bad humor                               <cell>Nasuco man aco
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t make me angry                             <cell>Ayao ca pagcasuco canaco
<row><cell lang=en>I can&apos;t contain myself for anger                <cell>Dili aco macapugong sa acong caligutgut
<row><cell lang=en>You make me fly into a passion                  <cell>Icao magahagit sa acong caligutgut
<row><cell lang=en>I avoid him as much as I can                    <cell>Licayan co sia in&gtilde;on sa mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am filled with anxiety                        <cell>Napono aco sa cayugut
<row><cell lang=en>Off!                                            <cell>Pahaua!
<row><cell lang=en>Hold!                                           <cell>Puyo!
<row><cell lang=en>Away!                                           <cell>Pahaua diha!
<row><cell lang=en>God forbid!                                     <cell>Simbaco!
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want?                               <cell>Onsay iquinahanglan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What is your coming?                            <cell>Onsay imong tuyo?
<row><cell lang=en>Why do you not answer to me?                    <cell>Mano di ca mutubag canaco?
<pb n=362 id=pb362><row><cell lang=en>You jest                                        <cell>Icao nagatiao tiao canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Hush!                                           <cell>Saba diha! Hilom!
<row><cell lang=en>Hark!                                           <cell>Mamati ca! Pan&gtilde;inhod ca!
<row><cell lang=en>Softly!                                         <cell>Sa pagcahinay!
<row><cell lang=en>I am obliged to refuse you                      <cell>Pilit aco nagaayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>By no means                                     <cell>Dili gayud mahimo
<row><cell lang=en>Don&apos;t refuse me                                 <cell>Ayao ca pagayad canaco
<row><cell lang=en>Begone!                                         <cell>Ayao! Ayao pagin&gtilde;on niana!
<row><cell lang=en>How!                                            <cell>N&gtilde;ano!
<row><cell lang=en>Off with you!                                   <cell>Pahaua diha! Mugoa ca!
<row><cell lang=en>Fie!                                            <cell>Pagcamacaulao niana! Nan!
<row><cell lang=en>I wish he would go                              <cell>Buut aco n&gtilde;a mupauli sia unta
<row><cell lang=en>What wickedness!                                <cell>Pagcadautan niana!
<row><cell lang=en>I am furious                                    <cell>Nasuco aco ug daco
<row><cell lang=en>That is very naughty                            <cell>Man&gtilde;il-ad man caayo cana
<row><cell lang=en>I am very angry with you                        <cell>Nasuco aco ug daco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>My patience is exhausted                        <cell>Guicauad-an na aco sa pagantos
</table>



<div1 id=s111>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa pagpamatuod, sa paglimod, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>It may be so                                    <cell>Mao cana caiha
<pb n=363 id=pb363><row><cell lang=en>Yes, certainly                                  <cell>Oo, mao cana gayud
<row><cell lang=en>I consent to it                                 <cell>Nagaoyon aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>It is probable                                  <cell>Mao man caiha
<row><cell lang=en>Nonsense!                                       <cell>Pagcasayop niana!
<row><cell lang=en>It is the matter of course                      <cell>Mao man cana bitao
<row><cell lang=en>Somebody told me so                             <cell>Guisuguinlan aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>It is not at all unlikely                       <cell>Cana mahimo man caiha
<row><cell lang=en>You are very forgetful                          <cell>Malimoton icao caayo
<row><cell lang=en>Would it not be better?                         <cell>Di ba labing maayo?
<row><cell lang=en>I remember it well                              <cell>Nahanumdum aco caayo niana
<row><cell lang=en>That is very true                               <cell>Matuod man lagui cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is likely                                    <cell>Mahimo man caiha
<row><cell lang=en>There is no reply to it                         <cell>Dili cabalibad-an cana
<row><cell lang=en>I doubt it much                                 <cell>Guicaduha duha-an co cana
<row><cell lang=en>I don&apos;t <corr sic=recollet>recollect</corr>     <cell>Dili aco mahanumdum
<row><cell lang=en>It is but too true                              <cell>Dili man quini cun dili ang matuod
<row><cell lang=en>There is not such a thing                       <cell>Dili mao cana
<row><cell lang=en>It recurred to my mind                          <cell>Nahanumdum aco
<row><cell lang=en>It is a story                                   <cell>Bacac man cana
<row><cell lang=en>I say it is                                     <cell>Nagamatuod aco n&gtilde;a mao
<row><cell lang=en>There is not a word of truth in it              <cell>Ualay bisan usa ca pulung n&gtilde;a matuod sa imong suguilon
<row><cell lang=en>If I remember it rightly                        <cell>Cun <corr sic=mahanumdun>mahanumdum</corr> aco unta ug maayo niana
<row><cell lang=en>You are mistaken                                <cell>Nasayop icao
<pb n=364 id=pb364><row><cell lang=en>To the best of my recollection                  <cell>In&gtilde;on sa paghinumdum co
<row><cell lang=en>I will remind you of it                         <cell>Pahinumduman co icao niana
<row><cell lang=en>Of course                                       <cell>Nan. Lagui
<row><cell lang=en>Bear in remembrance                             <cell>Ayao ca paghicalimot
<row><cell lang=en>I assure you                                    <cell>Nagapamatuod aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I must contradict you                           <cell>Quinahanglan n&gtilde;a magabatoc aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I bet it is so                                  <cell>Postahan ca icao n&gtilde;a mao cana
<row><cell lang=en>Rely upon what I tell you                       <cell>Sumalig ca sa acong pulong
<row><cell lang=en>There is no doubt about it                      <cell>Dili caduha duha-an cana
<row><cell lang=en>I deny it                                       <cell>Maglimod aco niana. Dili aco magaoyon niana
<row><cell lang=en>Not at all                                      <cell>Dili gayud
<row><cell lang=en>Did you not tell me that?                       <cell>Di ba icao ang nagsuguilon canaco niana?
<row><cell lang=en>Speak louder                                    <cell>Samton mo ang tin&gtilde;ug
<row><cell lang=en>Listen to me                                    <cell>Patalinghod ca. Mamati ca
<row><cell lang=en>That does not lie in my power                   <cell>Dili guican cana sa tinuyo. Dili aco magabuut niana
<row><cell lang=en>I shall always remember it                      <cell>Dili aco macalimot niana sa guihapon
<row><cell lang=en>I object to it                                  <cell>Dili aco muoyon
<row><cell lang=en>I have no objection to it                       <cell>Uala co icalalis niana
<pb n=365 id=pb365><row><cell lang=en>I swear that it is true                         <cell>Nanumpa aco n&gtilde;a matuod cana
<row><cell lang=en>I suppose so                                    <cell>Guihuna huna co lang cana
<row><cell lang=en>I suppose it isn&apos;t                              <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a dili mao cana
<row><cell lang=en>Do you think so?                                <cell>Mitoo ca ba niana?
<row><cell lang=en>I do                                            <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>I do not think so                               <cell>Dili aco mutoo niana
<row><cell lang=en>I believe it, too                               <cell>Mitoo aco usab niana
<row><cell lang=en>I can hardly believe it                         <cell>Lugus nacatoo aco niana
<row><cell lang=en>Nothing is more certain                         <cell>Uala ing lain n&gtilde;a labing matuod
<row><cell lang=en>I do not believe a word of it                   <cell>Dili aco mutoo bisan usa ca pulong
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is                                   <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a mao
<row><cell lang=en>I think it is not                               <cell>Naco n&gtilde;a dili mao
<row><cell lang=en>I presume it is                                 <cell>Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a mao man cana
<row><cell lang=en>I do not know what you say                      <cell>Uala aco macasabut sa imong pulong
<row><cell lang=en>I fancy that you are not right                  <cell>Naghuna huna aco n&gtilde;a uala icao ug hinungdan
<row><cell lang=en>I think you are wrong                           <cell>Nagahuna huna aco n&gtilde;a nasayop ca
<row><cell lang=en>You must know that news                         <cell>Icao mahibalo unta nianang noticia
<row><cell lang=en>Is it certain that your father is at home?      <cell>Matuod ba n&gtilde;a didto sa balay ang amahan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>It is right to tell you that report             <cell>Muan&gtilde;ay man ang pagpahibalo canimo nianang noticia
<pb n=366 id=pb366><row><cell lang=en>Is it true?                                     <cell>Matuod ba?
<row><cell lang=en>It is                                           <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>It is not                                       <cell>Dili
<row><cell lang=en>I answer for it                                 <cell>Aco lamang cun dili matuod ogaling cana
<row><cell lang=en>I guarantee you the fact                        <cell>Nagamatuod aco canimo nianang buhata
<row><cell lang=en>You may think that                              <cell>Icao n&gtilde;ani magahuna huna niana
<row><cell lang=en>You will easily understand that it is a lie     <cell>Masayon man ang pagcasabut mo n&gtilde;a bacac man cana
<row><cell lang=en>I should think so                               <cell>Mutuo aco unta niana
<row><cell lang=en>I believe you                                   <cell>Mitoo aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I maintain that it is a story                   <cell>Nagapamatuod aco canimo n&gtilde;a bacac man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is doubtful                                  <cell>Maduha duhaon man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It may be false                                 <cell>Dili gayud mahimo n&gtilde;a matuod cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is nothing                                   <cell>Ualay bisan onsa
<row><cell lang=en>You may believe me                              <cell>Tohoi aco nimo
</table>




<div1 id=s112>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa paghitin&gtilde;ala.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Is it possible?                                 <cell>Mahimo ba?
<row><cell lang=en>Indeed?                                         <cell>Matuod ba?
<row><cell lang=en>What! seriously?                                <cell>Diay! Matuod ba? Dili ba tiao?
<row><cell lang=en>It is superb                                    <cell>Dacoan niana
<pb n=367 id=pb367><row><cell lang=en>It is admirable                                 <cell>Tacus n&gtilde;a catin&gtilde;ad-an cana
<row><cell lang=en>How can that be?                                <cell>Onsaon paghimo cana?
<row><cell lang=en>It is astonishing                               <cell>Catin&gtilde;alahan man cana
<row><cell lang=en>What a wonder!                                  <cell>Pagcacatin&gtilde;alahan niana!
<row><cell lang=en>It is inconceivable                             <cell>Dili matuquib cana
<row><cell lang=en>What a prodigy!                                 <cell>Pagcahibolong niana!
<row><cell lang=en>What do I hear?                                 <cell>Onsay hindun&gtilde;gan co?
<row><cell lang=en>It is incredible                                <cell>Dili tohoan
<row><cell lang=en>It is unheard of                                <cell>Uala pa dun&gtilde;ga cutub
<row><cell lang=en>That is very strange                            <cell>Pagcalain da niana
<row><cell lang=en>You don&apos;t say?                                  <cell>Di ca mamolong?
<row><cell lang=en>I don&apos;t wonder at it                            <cell>Dili aco mahatin&gtilde;ala niana
<row><cell lang=en>Do it for my sake                               <cell>Buhaton mo cana tun&gtilde;od canaco
<row><cell lang=en>What a <corr sic=manificence>magnificence</corr>!               <cell>Cadacoan niana!
<row><cell lang=en>Strange!                                        <cell>Pastilan!
<row><cell lang=en>Why!                                            <cell>Diay!
<row><cell lang=en>Behold!                                         <cell>Tanaua! Soln&gtilde;a!
<row><cell lang=en>Welcome!                                        <cell>Maayong paganhi mo!
<row><cell lang=en>Hurrah!                                         <cell>Mabuhi! Viva!
<row><cell lang=en>Goodness gracious!                              <cell>Dios co!
<row><cell lang=en>Would to God!                                   <cell>Agad unta! Hinaot pa unta!
<row><cell lang=en>Cheer up!                                       <cell>Cusug! Calaqui!
<row><cell lang=en>He is not surprised at it                       <cell>Dili sia mahatin&gtilde;ala
<row><cell lang=en>For God&apos;s sake                                  <cell>Tun&gtilde;ud sa Dios
<row><cell lang=en>For pity&apos;s sake                                 <cell>Tun&gtilde;ud sa calooy
<row><cell lang=en>Heavens!                                        <cell>Dios co!
<row><cell lang=en>God help us!                                    <cell>Taban&gtilde;i came, Dios co!
<pb n=368 id=pb368><row><cell lang=en>God bless you!                                  <cell>Bendicionan ca unta sa Dios!
<row><cell lang=en>Take courage!                                   <cell>Calaqui!
<row><cell lang=en>Holla!                                          <cell>Diay!
<row><cell lang=en>So be it                                        <cell>Hinaot pa unta
</table>



<div1 id=s113>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa calooy, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I am very sorry for it                          <cell>Nasaquit aco
<row><cell lang=en>How unlucky I am!                               <cell>Pagcaalaot naco! Alaot aco intaon!
<row><cell lang=en>It is a sad thing                               <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon man cana
<row><cell lang=en>What a misfortune!                              <cell>Pagcaalaot intaon!
<row><cell lang=en>It breaks my heart                              <cell>Cana macapicas sa acong casingcasing
<row><cell lang=en>I can&apos;t bear any longer                         <cell>Dili na aco macaantos
<row><cell lang=en>It is <corr sic=shoking>shocking</corr>               <cell>Macalilisang man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is too sad                                   <cell>Masulobon man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is terrible                                  <cell>Macalilisang man
<row><cell lang=en>What a pity!                                    <cell>Pastilan odoy! Pastilan niana!
<row><cell lang=en>It is very hard indeed                          <cell>Magahi man lagui cana
<row><cell lang=en>I cannot grant your request                     <cell>Dili co mahimo pagtogot canimo sa imong guihan&gtilde;yo
<row><cell lang=en>I am mortified at it                            <cell>Nasubu aco ug daco
<row><cell lang=en>It is awful                                     <cell>Macalilisang man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It makes me shudder                             <cell>Cana nagapan&gtilde;urut curut canaco
<row><cell lang=en>It is very cruel                                <cell>Maban&gtilde;is man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It is very <corr sic=desappointing>disappointing</corr>       <cell>Cana nagpahaobus tinood
<pb n=369 id=pb369><row><cell lang=en>It is sad                                       <cell>Mamin&gtilde;aon man cana
<row><cell lang=en>It drives me to despair                         <cell>Cana magapauala canaco sa paglaom
<row><cell lang=en>It is dreadful                                  <cell>Macalilisang man cana. Macahahadluc man cana
</table>



<div1 id=s114>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa pagpan&gtilde;ayo ug sa pagtamod.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Thank you                                       <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I give you many thanks                          <cell>Nagahatag aco canimo sa daghang m&gtilde;a pagdiosmagbayad
<row><cell lang=en>Many thanks                                     <cell>Diosmagbayad sa macadaghan
<row><cell lang=en>Thanks                                          <cell>Diosmagbayad. Salamat
<row><cell lang=en>May I ask you?                                  <cell>Arang ba naco pagsuquit canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>You do me much honor                            <cell>Guitahod aco nimo tuod
<row><cell lang=en>May I ask you a favor?                          <cell>Mahimo cong paghan&gtilde;yo canimo ug usa ca utang buut?
<row><cell lang=en>You will greatly oblige me                      <cell>Buut icao mutabang canaco ug maayo
<row><cell lang=en>Pray, excuse me                                 <cell>Tabe
<row><cell lang=en>This is not worth mentioning                    <cell>Dili tacus hinumduman cana
<row><cell lang=en>Much obliged                                    <cell>Diosmagbayad canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Do not mention it                               <cell>Ayao ca pagpamulong sa tun&gtilde;ud niana
<pb n=370 id=pb370><row><cell lang=en>With all my heart                               <cell>Sa maayong cabubuton
<row><cell lang=en>I beg of you                                    <cell>Ipan&gtilde;amuyo co canimo
<row><cell lang=en>If you please                                   <cell>Cun dao maarang sa imong buut
<row><cell lang=en>Willingly                                       <cell>Sa tibooc n&gtilde;a casing casing co
<row><cell lang=en>You are very obliging                           <cell>Maabiabihon man icao tuod
<row><cell lang=en>You are very kind                               <cell>Maloloyon man icao
<row><cell lang=en>I am at your service                            <cell>Icaoy magabuut canaco
<row><cell lang=en>By your leave                                   <cell>Tabe canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I have a favor to beg of you                    <cell>Duna acoy ipan&gtilde;amuyo canimo usa ca utang buut
<row><cell lang=en>Will you do me a favor?                         <cell>Itogot ba aco nimo ug usa ca hatag?
<row><cell lang=en>Will you render me a service?                   <cell>Buut ca ba mutugot canaco ug usa ca utang buut?
<row><cell lang=en>I will give you many thanks for your kindness                   <cell>Buut aco magpahayag canimo sa acong pagtamod tun&gtilde;ud sa calooy mo
<row><cell lang=en>Do me a favor                                   <cell>Tuguti aco ug usa ca utang buut
<row><cell lang=en>I give you too much trouble                     <cell>Hinlabihan ang pagcasamoc co canimo
<row><cell lang=en>Do not mention it, please                       <cell>Nan&gtilde;amuyo aco canimo n&gtilde;a dili ca unta magahisgut niana
<row><cell lang=en>Grant me this favor                             <cell>Tuguti aco niining paghan&gtilde;yo
<pb n=371 id=pb371><row><cell lang=en>May I ask you to give me some money?            <cell>Man&gtilde;ahas aco sa pagpan&gtilde;ayo canimo n&gtilde;a taga-an aco unta ug salapi?
<row><cell lang=en>May I ask a favor of you?                       <cell>Arang ba naco paghan&gtilde;yo canimo ug usa ca hatag?
<row><cell lang=en>You may                                         <cell>Oo
<row><cell lang=en>What do you want?                               <cell>Onsay quinahanglan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>Permit me to ask you a question                 <cell>Tuguti aco sa pagtocso canimo
<row><cell lang=en>What have you to reply?                         <cell>Onsay icabalibad mo?
<row><cell lang=en>There is no reply to it                         <cell>Ualay icabalibad niana
<row><cell lang=en>What are you looking for?                       <cell>Onsay guipan&gtilde;ita mo?
<row><cell lang=en>I have a word to tell you                       <cell>Duna acoy ipamulong canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I wish to speak to you                          <cell>Buut aco mamulong canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I return you my best thanks                     <cell>Naghatag aco usab canimo sa daghang m&gtilde;a pagdiosmagbayad
</table>



<div1 id=s115>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa paghigugma, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>I like this child                               <cell>Guihigugma co quining bata
<row><cell lang=en>That man is dear to me                          <cell>Guihigugma co caayo canang tao
<row><cell lang=en>He is a friend of mine                          <cell>Abian co sia
<row><cell lang=en>I esteem him                                    <cell>Guicauili co sia
<pb n=372 id=pb372><row><cell lang=en>I hate him                                      <cell>Guidumtan co sia
<row><cell lang=en>What a tiresome man!                            <cell>Pagcalo-od nianang tao!
<row><cell lang=en>His manners are repulsive                       <cell>Ang iyang m&gtilde;a lihoc macalo-od
<row><cell lang=en>I can&apos;t bear him                                <cell>Dili aco macaantos cania
<row><cell lang=en>I detest him                                    <cell>Aco nacadumut cania
<row><cell lang=en>He displeases me                                <cell>Dili aco mahagugma cania
<row><cell lang=en>His look is not prepossessing                   <cell>Ang iyang daguay nacadaot cania
<row><cell lang=en>I am delighted with it                          <cell>Nalipay aco caayo niana
<row><cell lang=en>You have behaved ill                            <cell>Dili maayo ang buhat mo
<row><cell lang=en>I am greatly displeased with you                <cell>Dautan caayo ang pagbuut co sa tun&gtilde;ud canimo
<row><cell lang=en>What has offended you?                          <cell>Onsay nacasuco canimo?
<row><cell lang=en>You are very susceptible                        <cell>Madali masuco ca
<row><cell lang=en>I forgive you this time, but do not do so again                 <cell>Pasagdan ta icao caron, apan bantay ca ug magusob ca sa pagbuhat niana
<row><cell lang=en>I shall esteem you very much if you love me     <cell>Palanggaon ta icao ug maayo cun mahagugma ca canaco
</table>



<div1 id=s116>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa calipay, &amp;.</head>

<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>Are you satisfied?                              <cell>Nabalao na icao? Nalipay ca na ba?
<row><cell lang=en>I am very glad of it                            <cell>Nalipay aco
<pb n=373 id=pb373><row><cell lang=en>How pleased I am!                               <cell>Pagcadaco sa acong calipay!
<row><cell lang=en>I am overjoyed at it                            <cell>Nalipay aco caayo
<row><cell lang=en>I wish you joy                                  <cell>Nagaenhorabuena aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>I am highly pleased with it                     <cell>Guicalipayan aco caayo niana
<row><cell lang=en>He is beside himself with joy                   <cell>Hinlabihan ang calipay nia
<row><cell lang=en>I congratulate you                              <cell>Nagaenhorabuena aco canimo
<row><cell lang=en>You must do as you please                       <cell>Tumanon mo unta ang imong pagbuut. Icao lang
<row><cell lang=en>I am quite delighted                            <cell>Guihimuutan aco tuod
<row><cell lang=en>I feel much joy                                 <cell>Guicalipayan aco tinood
<row><cell lang=en>It is a great pleasure for me                   <cell>Cana nacalipay canaco ug daco
<row><cell lang=en>Ah! what happiness!                             <cell>Ah! pagcadacong palad!
<row><cell lang=en>It gives me the utmost pleasure                 <cell>Dacu uyamut ang calipay co tun&gtilde;ud niana
<row><cell lang=en>I have all I wish for                           <cell>Guidan&gtilde;at co ang tanan n&gtilde;a guitin&gtilde;uha co
<row><cell lang=en>If you knew how happy I am!                     <cell>Ug mahibalo ca unta sa pagcadaco sa acong palad!
<row><cell lang=en>Nothing could make me happier                   <cell>Uala ing lain n&gtilde;a macalipay canaco sa in&gtilde;on
<row><cell lang=en>Contentment is better than wealth               <cell>Ang calipay palabihon pa sa n&gtilde;atanan n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a bahandi
</table>


<pb n=374 id=pb374>
<div1 id=s117>
<head>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong sa cahadluc, &amp;.</head>


<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>What do you fear?                               <cell>Onsay cahadlucan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>What are you afraid of?                         <cell>Onsay cahadlucan mo?
<row><cell lang=en>There is nothing to be feared                   <cell>Ualay bisan onsang cahadlucan
<row><cell lang=en>I am frightened                                 <cell>Hinculba-an aco
<row><cell lang=en>Reassure yourself                               <cell>Sumalig ca, dili ca mahadluc
<row><cell lang=en>I am getting quite uneasy                       <cell>Minsugod na aco sa <corr sic="pag cahadluc">pagcahadluc</corr>
<row><cell lang=en>I advise you not to think of it                 <cell>Nagasambag aco canimo n&gtilde;a dili ca unta maghuna huna niana
<row><cell lang=en>Leave that to me                                <cell>Pasagdi aco
<row><cell lang=en>Help, help!                                     <cell>Tabang, tabang!
<row><cell lang=en>O God! Good God!                                <cell>Dios co!
<row><cell lang=en>O Lord!                                         <cell>Guino-o!
<row><cell lang=en>Thank God!                                      <cell>Salamat sa Dios!
<row><cell lang=en>Take care!                                      <cell>Bantay ca baya!
<row><cell lang=en>What!                                           <cell>Onsa! Onsalan!
<row><cell lang=en>Alas!                                           <cell>Ay, alaot aco intaon!
<row><cell lang=en>Thieves, thieves!                               <cell>Cauatan, cauatan!
</table>





<pb n=375 id=pb375>
<div1 id=s118>
<head>M&gtilde;a panigin&gtilde;nan sa m&gtilde;a sulat, &amp;.</head>



<p><table rend="class(voc)">
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My dear friend,

<p>I have the honor to invite you to spend the evening with us. I hope you will do your best to give me the pleasure of coming and I shall be very glad if you do not refuse me this favor. There will be music and dancing, and I think I may promise you a merry evening.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your friend,

<p rend="class(signed)">Thomas.

<p>Sunday morning


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Abian co n&gtilde;a hinigugma,

<p>Nalipay aco sa pagabi abi canimo sa paganhi sa amo carong gabi-i. Milaom aco n&gtilde;a oyonan mo quining pagabi abi co canimo ug malipay aco ug daco cun dili ca unta magadili sa acong guihan&gtilde;yo. Dunay música ug pagsayao, ug, sa acong pagsabut, muagui ca ug usa ca gabi-i n&gtilde;a malilipayon.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang higala mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Tomás.

<p>Domingo sa buntag


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My friend,

<p>I accept with thanks your kind invitation and I am very much obliged to you for your goodness. If I have no occupations I will be at your pleasant company at seven o&apos;clock.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours truly,

<p rend="class(signed)">Henry.

<p>Sunday forenoon


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Abian co,

<p>Nadauat co sa dacong pagtamod ang hiligugmaon mong pagabi abi canaco ug nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo sa nacadaghan tun&gtilde;ud sa imong calooy. Cun uala aco unta ug m&gtilde;a cabilinggan diha na aco sa a las siete uban canimo magahiagom sa imong malilipayon n&gtilde;a pagquita.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang matuod n&gtilde;a abian mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Enrique.

<p>Domingo sa modto


<pb n=376 id=pb376>
<row><cell lang=en>

<p rend="class(salute)">Dear friend,

<p>Pray do not expect me <corr sic="to night">to-night</corr> because I shall be engaged the whole evening. The bearer of this will explain the reasons which oblige me to refuse your invitation.

<p>I am sure you will <corr sic=aprove>approve</corr> of them.

<p rend="class(signed)">I am yours truly,

<p rend="class(signed)">Henry.

<p>Sunday evening.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma n&gtilde;a abian co,

<p>Ipan&gtilde;amuyo co canimo n&gtilde;a dili ca maghulat canaco cay dunay buluhaton co sa tibooc n&gtilde;a gabi-i. Ang nagadala niini magapahibalo canimo sa m&gtilde;a hinungdan n&gtilde;a nanaglugus canaco sa pagdili sa imong pagabi abi.

<p>Uala acoy duha duha n&gtilde;a dauaton mo canang m&gtilde;a balibad.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang matuod n&gtilde;a higala mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Enrique.

<p>Domingo sa hapon.




<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My dear Cousin,

<p>I was very sorry to hear that you are not well, but I hope you will be better very soon and in a short time you could leave the bed. I am ever thinking of you and often talking with our friends about your illness. I promise to call at you one day or other.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your loving cousin,

<p rend="class(signed)">Alphonsus.



<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma n&gtilde;a igagao co,

<p>Nasaquit aco ug daco sa paghibalo n&gtilde;a nagadaot ca, apan milaom aco n&gtilde;a madali magmaayo ayo ca ug mubia ca unta sa higda-an sa dili na madugay. Canunay nagapalandong aco canimo ug nagasulti sa masubsub uban sa atong m&gtilde;a isigcain&gtilde;on sa tun&gtilde;ud sa saquit mo. Nagasa-ad aco sa pagduao canimo sa usa ca adlao.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang mahigugmaon n&gtilde;a igagao mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Alfonso.


<pb n=377 id=pb377>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Alphonsus,

<p>I received your letter asking after my illness, and I am very much obliged to you for your kind wishes of seeing me in good health very soon. I am very happy to say you that I am much better now, and I hope to recover myself in a few days.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your Cousin,

<p rend="class(signed)">John.



<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Alfonso,

<p>Nadauat co ang imong sulat n&gtilde;a may tuyo ang pagsusi sa acong saquit, ug nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo tun&gtilde;ud sa caicog mo sa pagquita canaco n&gtilde;a mapiscay ug lauas sa dili madugay. Daco ang calipay co sa pagpahibalo canimo n&gtilde;a maayo ayo na man aco caron ug milaom aco n&gtilde;a sa pila ca adlao ulian aco sa capiscay sa lauas.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang igagao mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Juan.


<pb n=378 id=pb378>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Jane,

<p>I should like to call at you this evening, but the day is so bad that I cannot go out. I <corr sic=supose>suppose</corr> you are kept in-doors like myself, so I write this note to spend the time in a good work, as to ask you how do you do and all your younger brothers. I do not know if the doctor will be able to come to visit my mother who is still very weak. If he come we shall have a pleasant while speaking of the news of the present war.

<p>I hope to see you to-morrow morning.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours,

<p rend="class(signed)">Elizabeth.



<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma co si Juana,

<p>Muduao aco unta canimo carong hapon, apan in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a dautan ang tiempo n&gtilde;a dili aco macahimo pagcanaog. Guipacain&gtilde;on co n&gtilde;a main&gtilde;on canaco, diha icao usab sa balay, busa nagasulat aco canimo niining sulat sa pagpulus sa tiempo sa usa ca buhat n&gtilde;a maayo, sanglet, ang pagsuquit canimo comusta icao ug ang m&gtilde;a manghod mo. Ambut cun macaanhi ba ang médico sa pagduao sa acong mama n&gtilde;a maluya pa caayo. Cun muanhi unta sia muagui came ug usa ca horas n&gtilde;a malipayon sa pagsulti sa m&gtilde;a noticia sa pagpangubat caron.

<p>Nagahuna huna aco sa pagquita canimo ugma sa buntag.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang imong sologo-on,

<p rend="class(signed)">Isabel.


<pb n=379 id=pb379>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear friend,

<p>Like you, I am confined to the house on account of the weather, but I am not sorry for it because here is the doctor and we are all playing at dominos. He says that he cannot go to you this evening and see your mother, but he promises to visit her to-morrow.

<p>Give my kind regards to your mamma.

<p rend="class(signed)">Jane.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma n&gtilde;a abian co,

<p>In&gtilde;on canimo, dinhi man aco sa balay tun&gtilde;ud sa tiempo, apan dili aco magbasol cay ania man ang médico ug nanagdula cameng tanan sa dominó. Pulong nia n&gtilde;a dili mahimo niang paghapit sa iño carong hapon sa pagquita sa imong mama, apan nagasa-ad sia sa pagduao cania ugma.

<p>Ipan&gtilde;amosta aco sa imong mama.

<p rend="class(signed)">Juana.



<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Miss,

<p>I invite you to a party that we are going to have on next Wednesday in my grandfather&apos;s farm, and papa told me that he will be very happy to see you. I hope you will not refuse my invitation to accompany us and I promise you a merry day.

<p rend="class(signed)">I am yours sincerely,

<p rend="class(signed)">Monica.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Talahoron n&gtilde;a Señorita,

<p>Nagaabi abi aco canimo sa pagagui ug usa ca malin&gtilde;aon n&gtilde;a adlao n&gtilde;a guipanagana namu oña sa Miércoles didto sa hacienda sa acong apohan, ug ang acong papa namulong canaco n&gtilde;a malipay sia ug daco cun muuban icao usab canamu. Milaom aco n&gtilde;a dili ca maga-ayad unta niining pagabi abi canimo sa pagadto ug nagasa-ad aco n&gtilde;a da-an canimo ug usa ca malipayon n&gtilde;a adlao.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang mahigugmaon n&gtilde;a magsisilve mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mónica.


<pb n=380 id=pb380>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Monica,

<p>I <corr sic=recept>receive</corr> with thanks your kind invitation and I hope to accompany you on next Wednesday, as you say. I think you will start early to the farm, so I will be at you at six o&apos;clock in the morning.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your sincere friend,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mary.



<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma co si Mónica,

<p>Nadauat co sa dacong pagtamod ang mahinalangpon mong pagabi abi canaco ug nagalaom aco sa paguban canimo oña sa Miércoles, in&gtilde;on sa pulong mo. Nagahuna huna aco n&gtilde;a masayo ang pagguican mo padolong sa hacienda, busa muadto aco sa iño sa a las seis sa buntag.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang imong higala n&gtilde;a quinasing casing,

<p rend="class(signed)">María.



<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Monica,

<p>I am very much obliged to your kind invitation but I am very sorry to say that I cannot go with you, because my father is going to start to Cebu Friday next and I have very much to do. I will be very glad to hear you have spended a pleasant day.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mary.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Mónica,

<p>Nagadiosmagbayad aco canimo sa nacadaghan tun&gtilde;ud sa mahigugmaon mong pagabi abi canaco, apan nasaquit aco tinood sa pagpahibalo canimo n&gtilde;a dili aco macahimo muuban canimo, tun&gtilde;ud cay ang acong amahan muadto sa Sugbu oña sa Viernes ug daghang man caayo ang m&gtilde;a buhat co. Malipay aco unta ug daco sa paghibalo n&gtilde;a guiaguian niño ug usa ca adlao n&gtilde;a malipayon.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang imong magsisilve,

<p rend="class(signed)">María.


<pb n=381 id=pb381>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My loving Friend,

<p>I am very sorry to say that I shall not be able to go for that pleasant party with you on next Wednesday, as my mamma has caught a cold and I have to take care of her and keep the house.

<p>If you will not be vexed on account of this answer to your kind invitation, I should beg of you to come and see me to-morrow, for I have many things to tell you.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours sincerely,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mary.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Abian cong mahiligugmaon,

<p>Nasubu aco ug daco sa pagbalos canimo n&gtilde;a dili aco macahimo muuban canimo sa pagagui nianang malin&gtilde;aon n&gtilde;a adlao oña sa Miércoles, cay nasip-on ang acong mama ug dunay acong pagalima cania ug pagbantay sa balay.

<p>Cun dili ca ogaling masuco niining balos co sa <pb n=382 id=pb382>imong maloloyon n&gtilde;a paghinungdum canaco, muhan&gtilde;yo aco canimo n&gtilde;a muari ca unta <corr sic="sa pagquita canaco sa pagquita canaco">sa pagquita canaco</corr> cay dunay acong daghang m&gtilde;a noticia n&gtilde;a isuguilon canimo.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang higala mong matuod,

<p rend="class(signed)">María.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My dear,

<p>I am very grieved to hear of your mother&apos;s illness. I send you a few newspapers which I trust will lighten your tedious confinement to the house, and I will come and see you to-morrow afternoon.

<p>Hoping to find your mama better

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours truly,

<p rend="class(signed)">Monica.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma co,

<p>Nasubu aco tinood sa paghibalo n&gtilde;a masaquit ang imong anan. Guipahatod co canimo ug pila ca mantala-an n&gtilde;a sa uala ing duha duha magalin&gtilde;ao lin&gtilde;ao sa imong mamin&gtilde;aon n&gtilde;a pagpuyo diha sa balay ug ugma sa palis muari aco sa pagquita canimo.

<p>Nagalaom sa pagquita sa imong mama n&gtilde;a maayo ayo

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang ubus n&gtilde;a <corr sic="sologo-onmo.">sologo-on mo,</corr>

<p rend="class(signed)">Mónica.


<pb n=383 id=pb383>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear<corr sic=","></corr> Niece,

<p>Some friends are going to drink tea with us next Saturday, and your aunt says she will be very happy if you could come. I am sure I should be very pleased myself to see you, so do come.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your uncle,

<p rend="class(signed)">Edward.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Hinigugma cong pagumangcon,

<p>Pila ca abian muanhi sa amo oña sa Sábado sa paginom ug sha ug ang ia-an mo namulong man n&gtilde;a malipay sia ug daco cun muanhi ca unta. Uala acoy duha duha n&gtilde;a malipay aco usab tinood sa pagquita canimo sa amo, busa umari ca.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang imong ayo-an,

<p rend="class(signed)">Eduardo.


<row><cell lang=en>&mdash;Mr. and Mrs. Romero present their compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Serna and hope to be honored with their company at dinner to-morrow at half past eleven.

<cell>&mdash;Si Sr. Romero ug ang iyang asaua nan&gtilde;amosta can Sr. Serna ug sa iyang asaua ug nanaglaom sa pagquita canila sa ila sa pagpaniodto ugma sa a las once y media.

<row><cell lang=en>&mdash;The President of this town presents his kind regards to Mr. Niere and his family and has the honor to invite him to the feast of the town that will be celebrated on next Tuesday.

<cell>&mdash;Ang presidente sa longsod nan&gtilde;amosta can Sr. Niere ug sa iyang m&gtilde;a loon ug nagaabi abi cania sa Fiesta sa longsod n&gtilde;a mao oña sa Martes.

<pb n=384 id=pb384>
<row><cell lang=en>&mdash;The daughters of Blessed Mary will celebrate their principal Feast on 31st of present month in the Church of S. Nicolas and beg your assistance to the services which shall begin at eight o&apos;clock in the morning.

<cell>&mdash;Ang Caponongponon&gtilde;an sa m&gtilde;a anac ni Maria managpasidun&gtilde;ug sa ilang Patrona oña sa 31 niining bulana sa singbahan sa S. Nicolás ug nan&gtilde;amuyo sa imong pagtambung sa m&gtilde;a buluhaton sa maong singbahan n&gtilde;a musugud sa a las ocho sa buntag.

<row><cell lang=en>&mdash;Mrs. Cortes <corr sic=present>presents</corr> her compliments to Mrs. Flores and requests she will excuse her not having been at home yesterday. To-morrow as she will not go out during the day Mrs. Flores will be sure to find her at home.

<cell>&mdash;Si Sta. Cortés nan&gtilde;amosta can Sta. Flores ug nan&gtilde;ayo cania ug pagpasaylo tun&gtilde;ud cay uala sia sa balay sa pagduao cania cahapon. Ugma cay dili sia manaog sa tibooc n&gtilde;a adlao dili magduha duha si Sta. Flores sa paghiabut cania sa balay.

<row><cell lang=en>&mdash;Mr. P. Gonzaga: Have the goodness to call on me next Monday as I wish to see you on account of a important subject.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ortega.

<cell>&mdash;Sr. D. P. Gonzaga: Ipan&gtilde;amuyo co canimo n&gtilde;a muari unta sa amo oña sa Lunes cay quinahanglan co ang pagsulti canimo sa tun&gtilde;ud sa usa ca dacong tuyo.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ortega.


<pb n=385 id=pb385>
<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">My dear friend,

<p>It was with feelings of the most painful nature I heard of the loss you have experienced by the death of your good and kind mamma. I hope you will not be very sorry for it as you think of her virtues. I love you dearly, and will do all I can to comfort you.

<p>I will call at you to-morrow, and believe me,

<p>My dear,

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours sincerely,

<p rend="class(signed)">Benedict.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Abian co n&gtilde;a hinigugma,

<p>Nasubú aco ug daco sa paghibalo n&gtilde;a guicamatyan ca sa maayo ug maloloyon n&gtilde;a inahan mo. Milaom aco n&gtilde;a dili ca unta masubu sa hinlabihan cun maghuna huna ca sa m&gtilde;a virtudes nia. Aco nahagugma caayo canimo ug buhaton co ang tanan n&gtilde;a acong mahimo sa pagpauala sa imong casaquit.

<p>Duaon ta icao ugma, ug tumoo ca,

<p>Hinigugma co,

<p rend="class(signed)">Sa higala mo n&gtilde;a matuod,

<p rend="class(signed)">Benito.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Father,

<p>I write to ask you if you will be so kind enough to teach me English, for I like very much to learn that language, and I hope to speak it in a few months.

<p>If you will take the trouble to teach me I shall be so much obliged to you.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours respectfully,

<p rend="class(signed)">Joseph.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Talahoron n&gtilde;a Pare,

<p>Nagasulat aco sa pagpan&gtilde;utana canimo cun maloloyon ca ba sa in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a buut unta magatodlo canaco sa iningles, cay nahagugma aco caayo macatoon nianang pinolon&gtilde;an ug naghuna <pb n=386 id=pb386>huna aco n&gtilde;a arang aco macasulti niana sa pila ca bulan.

<p>Ug itogot unta nimo ang guihan&gtilde;yo co magadiosmagbayad aco canimo sa macadaghan.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang matinahoron n&gtilde;a magsisilve mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">José.



<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Sir,

<p>Can you return me the books I lent you a few weeks ago? A friend of my father to whom he has promised them is waiting to read them. I am sure you will therefore send them to me at once.

<p rend="class(signed)">I am ever yours sincerely,

<p rend="class(signed)">Anthony.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Talahoron n&gtilde;a Guino-o,

<p>Mahimo mong paguli canaco sa m&gtilde;a libro n&gtilde;a guihulam co canimo sa dugay na pila ca semana? Usa ca amigos sa acong amahan n&gtilde;a iyang guisaaran canila nagahulat sa pagbasa nianang m&gtilde;a libro. Busa uala aco ing duha duha n&gtilde;a ulian aco unta nimo sa maong m&gtilde;a libro sa labing madali.

<p rend="class(signed)">Aco man guihapon ang matuod n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Antonio.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(salute)">Dear Sir,

<p>I return the books you were so kind as to lend me, with best thanks. I have read them <corr sic=trough>through</corr>, and I think they are very pretty.

<p rend="class(signed)">I am yours<corr>,</corr>

<p rend="class(signed)">Peter.


<cell>
<p rend="class(salute)">Talahoron n&gtilde;a Guino-o,

<p>Iuli co canimo ang m&gtilde;a <pb n=387 id=pb387>libro n&gtilde;a guihulam mo canaco guican sa imong calooy ug nagadiosmag-bayad aco canimo sa nacadaghan. Guibasa co sila ug maayo ug guihuna huna co n&gtilde;a mapulus man sila tinood.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Pedro.



<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Cebu, June 1, 1904.

<p>Draft for $ 50&mdash;

<p rend="class(salute)">Sir,

<p>At fifteen days&apos; sight, please to pay this my first of exchange, to the order of Mr. I. Garcia, for the sum of fifty pesos, value received in merchandise and place it to my account.

<p rend="class(signed)">Your humble servant,

<p rend="class(signed)">Rodriguez.



<cell>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Sugbu, Junio<corr sic=","></corr> 1, 1904.

<p>Letra sa $ 50&mdash;

<p rend="class(salute)">Guino-o,

<p>Sa icapolo ug lima ca adlao cutub sa pagquita mo niining letra n&gtilde;a nahauna mubayad ca can D. I. García sa calim-an ca pisus, bili sa m&gtilde;a igbabaliguia n&gtilde;a nadauat co, ug ibutang mo canang cantidad sa acong cuenta.

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Rodríguez.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Iloilo, January 5, 1905.

<p>Draft for $ 1000,00&mdash;

<p rend="class(salute)">Sir,

<p>At triple usance, please to pay this my first of exchange to Mr. Lopez or his order, the sum of one thousand pesos for value received, which you will pass to my account, at per advise from your humble servant

<p rend="class(signed)">Gonzalez.


<cell>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Iloilo, Enero 5, 1905.

<p>Letra sa $ 1000,00&mdash;

<p rend="class(salute)">Guino-o,

<p>Sa icacasiaman ca adlao <pb n=388 id=pb388>cutub sa pagquita niining nahaunang letra co, bay-ran mo si Sr. López cun ang sinugo nia sa cantidad sa usa ca libo ca pisus, salapi n&gtilde;a nadauat co ug n&gtilde;a isulat mo sa acong cuenta in&gtilde;on sa guipahibalo canimo niining ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on

<p rend="class(signed)">González.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Manila<corr>,</corr> March 10, 1904.

<p>Draft for 200 $<corr>.</corr>

<p rend="class(salute)">Sir,

<p>At sight please to pay this my sole bill of exchange, to the order of Mr. Font, the sum of two hundred pesos, value received from Mr. Prat, and pass to my account, your humble servant

<p rend="class(signed)">Alvarez<corr>.</corr>


<cell>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Manila, Marzo 10, 1904.

<p>Letra sa 200 $.

<p rend="class(salute)">Guino-o,

<p>Human mo dauata quining acong letra da, magabayad ca can Sr. Font, sa duha ca gatus ca pisus, salapi n&gtilde;a nadauat co sa camot ni Sr. Prat, ug isulat mo canang cantidad sa cuenta niining ubus n&gtilde;a sologo-on mo

<p rend="class(signed)">Alvarez.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Cebu, February 15, 1904.

<p rend="class(salute)">Sir,

<p>We have received the letter you did us the honor to write on the 7 instant, with the <corr sic=envoice>invoice</corr> of the goods you have forwarded us, amounting to: $&nbsp;3,000, which we have placed to your credit.

<p rend="class(signed)">We remain, Sir, yours most truly,

<p rend="class(signed)">Romero &amp; Sons.


<cell>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Sugbu, Febrero 15, 1904.

<p rend="class(salute)">Talaharon n&gtilde;a Guino-o,

<p>Nadauat namu ang sulat n&gtilde;a guifechahan mo <pb n=389 id=pb389>sa icapito niining bulana, uban sa lista sa m&gtilde;a igbaliguia n&gtilde;a guipahatod mo canamu ug n&gtilde;a guibalihan mo sa cantidad sa tolo ca libo ca pisus n&gtilde;a guibutang na namu sa imong cuenta.

<p rend="class(signed)">In&gtilde;on sa guihapon magsugo ca, Guinoo, sa imong m&gtilde;a magsilve,

<p rend="class(signed)">Romero ug ang m&gtilde;a Anac.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Cebu, 1st September, 1904.

<p rend="class(salute)">Sir,

<p>In answer to the letter with which you honored us on the 20th of last month, we send you herewith, as you desired, an abstract of your current account with us, down to the 31st of last month and balance at that date by:

<p>$ 451,00 in our favor. You will please, for the sake of regularity, to let us know whether you find it correct.

<p rend="class(signed)">Yours truly,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mirasol.


<cell>
<p rend="class(dateline)">Sugbu, 1 sa Setiembre sa 1904.

<p rend="class(salute)">Talahoron n&gtilde;a Guino-o,

<p>Sa pagbalos namo sa imong sulat n&gtilde;a guipahatod mo canamo sa fecha n&gtilde;a icacaloha-an sa bulan n&gtilde;a miagui, ania man guiapil namo, in&gtilde;on sa imong guitin&gtilde;uha, ang cuenta mo hasta sa 31 sa maong bulana, ug n&gtilde;a in&gtilde;on n&gtilde;a arang maquita mo mao $ 451,00 n&gtilde;a nautang mo canamu. Ipan&gtilde;amuyo namu canimo n&gtilde;a ipahibalo mo unta <pb n=390 id=pb390>canamu cun dunay ogaling sayop sa among pagisip ug in&gtilde;on usab ang payoyon mo nianang utang<corr>.</corr>

<p rend="class(signed)">Ang magsisilve mo,

<p rend="class(signed)">Mirasol.


<row><cell lang=en>
<p rend="class(address)">To Mr. R. Cortes, merchant,

<p rend="class(address)">Cebu.

<p>I hereby acknowledge that I owe and promise to pay on the 1st of May next, to Mr. Basig, the sum of one hundred pesos which he lent me.

<p rend="class(dateline)">Iloilo, March 20, 1903.

<p rend="class(signed)">Roma.


<cell>

<p rend="class(address)">Can D. R. Cortés, magbabaliguia,

<p rend="class(address)">Sugbu.


<p>Nagamatuod aco n&gtilde;a utan&gtilde;an co si Sr. Basig sa cantidad sa usa ca gatus ca pisus n&gtilde;a guihulam nia canaco, ug nagasa-ad aco sa paguli cania nianang salapi oña sa nahauna sa bulan sa Mayo.

<p rend="class(dateline)">Iloilo, Marzo 20, 1903.

<p rend="class(signed)">Roma.
</table>



<pb n=391 id=pb391>
<div1 id=vocabulario>
<head>VOCABULARIO <corr sic="ÑGA">N&Gtilde;A</corr> DIOTAY</head>

<head type=sub>sa pagcasangpot sa m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a iningles.</head>


<p>Sa pagcatapus niining basahon guihuna huna co n&gtilde;a muan&gtilde;ay man ang pagdugang niining diotay n&gtilde;a <hi>vocabulario</hi> sa m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a labing nahauna ug quinahanglan uban sa pagcaloas nila cay aron dili culan&gtilde;an quining libro sa usa ca bahin n&gtilde;a matin&gtilde;uhaon sa n&gtilde;atanan m&gtilde;a magbabasa. Bisan guisulat co sa sinugdan n&gtilde;a dili man ang tuyo co ang pagsumpay sa pagcasangpot sa m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a iningles, mitangdo aco lang sa m&gtilde;a sambag sa ubang m&gtilde;a higala, ug ania man quining catapusan n&gtilde;a bahin n&gtilde;a guipopo naco sa diccionario. Uala co isulat dinhi ang m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a guibasa in&gtilde;on sa guisulat, cay anogon man canang cabudlay. Sa pagcasabut sa pagcasangpot n&gtilde;a nagasunud sa tagsa ca pulong tacus man n&gtilde;a pagtiman-an quining m&gtilde;a pahamatn&gtilde;on:

<p>1.<hi rend=sup>a</hi> Ang m&gtilde;a letra <hi>e</hi> ug <hi>o</hi> n&gtilde;a sinulat sa in&gtilde;on niini cun sa pagagui n&gtilde;a guihin&gtilde;anlan bastardilla, basahon main&gtilde;on sa <hi>eu</hi> francés.

<p>2.<hi rend=sup>a</hi> Ang <hi>ch</hi> ug ang <hi>d</hi> n&gtilde;a bastardilla usab guitin&gtilde;ug sa usa ca agui n&gtilde;a caogalin&gtilde;on da sa pinolon&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a inglés.

<p>3.<hi rend=sup>a</hi> Ang pagcasangpot sa ubang m&gtilde;a letra mao in&gtilde;on sa quinachila.



<pb n=392 id=pb392><list>
<item>A, ei
<item>abatement, abéitment
<item>abbess, ábes
<item>abbreviation, abrivié<hi>che</hi>n
<item>abide, abáid
<item>able, éibel
<item>aboard, abóord
<item>above, abóv
<item>about, abáut
<item>absence, ábsens
<item>absolute, ábsoliut
<item>absolution, absolú<hi>che</hi>n
<item>accent, áksent
<item>accept, aksépt
<item>acceptance, akséptans
<item>acception, asksép<hi>che</hi>n
<item>accessible, aksésibel
<item>accommodate, acómodeit
<item>accompany, ac<hi>ó</hi>mpani
<item>accomplice, acómplis
<item>account, akáunt
<item>accuracy, ákiurasi
<item>accusation, akiusé<hi>che</hi>n
<item>accuse, akíus
<item>accustom, ak<hi>ó</hi>stom
<item>aches, eks
<item>acknowledge, aknólech
<item>acolyte, ácolait
<item>acquaintance, akuéintans
<item>acquainted, akuéinted
<item>acquire, akúaiar
<item>acquit, akúit
<item>acre, éiker
<item>action, ac<hi>ché</hi>n
<item>active<corr>,</corr> áctiv
<item>actual, ákchual
<item>acute, akiút
<item>addition, adí<hi>che</hi>n
<item>additional, adí<hi>ch</hi>onal
<item>adhere, adjíar
<item><corr sic=adjetive>adjective</corr>, <corr sic="ádyetiv">ádyektiv</corr>
<item>adjudge, adyéj
<item>adjust, adyost
<item>admirable, ádmirabel
<item>admiration, admiré<hi>che</hi>n
<item>admirer, admáirer
<item>admiringly, admáirinli
<item>admission, admí<hi>che</hi>n
<item>advance, adváns
<item>advantage, advántach
<item>adventure, advénch<hi>e</hi>r
<item>advertise, ádvertais
<item>advice, adváis
<item>affair, aféar
<item>affectation, afectéi<hi>che</hi>n
<item>affection, aféc<hi>che</hi>n
<item>affirm, af<hi>e</hi>rm
<item>affliction, aflíc<hi>che</hi>n
<item>afraid, afréid
<item>afternoon, áfternun
<pb n=393 id=pb393><item>afterwards, áfteruords
<item>again, aguéin
<item>against, aguéinst
<item>age, ei<hi>ch</hi>
<item>agency, éi<hi>ch</hi>ensi
<item>agent, éi<hi>ch</hi>ent
<item>ago, egó
<item>agree, agrí
<item>agreeable, agríebel
<item>agreement, agríment
<item>ague, éguiu
<item>aid, éid
<item>aigret, éigret
<item>ail, éil
<item>aim, éim
<item>air, éar
<item>ale, éil
<item>alike, aláik
<item>alive, aláiv
<item>all, ol
<item>alliance, aláians
<item>alligator, aliguéitor
<item>allow, aláu
<item>ally, alái
<item>almond, ámond
<item>almost, ólmost
<item>alms, ams
<item><corr sic=alnight>all night</corr>, olnáit
<item>alone, alóun
<item>aloud, aláud
<item>already, olrédi
<item>also, olso
<item>altar, óltar
<item>although, ólzou
<item>altogether, oltoguédar
<item>always, ólueis
<item>ambition, ambi<hi>ch</hi>en
<item>amiable<corr>,</corr> ámiabel
<item>amount, amáunt
<item>amuse, amiús
<item>amusement, amíusment
<item>anchor, ánkor
<item>ancient, én<hi>ch</hi>ent
<item>angel, én<hi>ch</hi>el
<item>anger, ánguer
<item>animated, animéited
<item>ankle, ánkel
<item>announce, anáons
<item>answer, ánser
<item>anxiety, anxáieti
<item>anxious, án<hi>che</hi>s
<item>any, éni
<item>anybody, enibódi
<item>anything, enizín
<item>apace, apéis
<item>ape, éip
<item>apothecary, apózecari
<item>appeal, apíl
<item>appear, apíer
<item>appetite, apitáit
<item>applaud, aplód
<item>applause, aplós
<pb n=394 id=pb394><item>apple, ápel
<item>applies, apláis
<item>apply, aplái
<item>appreciate, aprí<hi>ch</hi>ieit
<item>apprehend, aprijénd
<item>apprentice, apréntis
<item>approach, apróuch
<item>approbation, apróbe<hi>ch</hi>en
<item>approve, aprúv
<item><corr sic=april>April</corr>, épril
<item>arise, aráis
<item>arithmetic, arízmetic
<item>arm-chair, arm-chéar
<item>around, aráund
<item>array, aréi
<item>arrival, aráival
<item>arrive, aráiv
<item>article, ártikel
<item>ashamed, a<hi>ch</hi>éimd
<item>ash, a<hi>ch</hi>
<item>aside, esáid
<item>asleep, aslíp
<item>aspire, aspáiar
<item>assault, asólt
<item>assemble, asémbel
<item>association, asosié<hi>che</hi>n
<item>asylum, asáilom
<item>attentive, aténtiv
<item>attorney, atórni
<item>august, ógu<hi>e</hi>st
<item>aunt, áant
<item>author, ózor
<item>autumn, ót<hi>o</hi>m
<item>avail, avéil
<item>avarice, ávaris
<item>average, ávereich
<item>await, auéit
<item>awake, auéik
<item>aware<corr>,</corr> auéar
<item>away, auéi
<item>awl, ol
<item>awoke, auóuk
<item>axe, aks

<item>Baby, bébi
<item>bacon, béicon
<item>backward, bak-ú<hi>o</hi>r
<item>badger, bádyer
<item><corr sic=baggag>baggage</corr>, bága<hi>ch</hi>
<item>bail, béil
<item>bait, béit
<item>bake, béik
<item>baker, béiker
<item>bakery, béikeri
<item>balance, bálans
<item>bald, bold
<item>bale, béil
<item>ball, bol
<item>balloon, balún
<item>bandage, bánda<hi>ch</hi>
<item>bane, béin
<item>baneful, béinful
<pb n=395 id=pb395><item>bangle, bánguel
<item>bank-note, bank-nóut
<item>banquet, bánkuit
<item>baptise, baptáis
<item>bare, béir
<item>barebone, beirbóun
<item>barefaced, beirféi<hi>ch</hi>
<item>barefoot, beirfút
<item>bareheaded, beirhéded
<item>bargain, bárguin
<item>barley, bárli
<item>barrel, bárel
<item>base, béis
<item>basement, béisment
<item>basin, béisin
<item>bath, baz
<item>bathe, béiz
<item>bathing, béizin
<item>battle, bátel
<item>bay, béi
<item>be, bi
<item>beach, bich
<item>bead, bid
<item>beadle, bídel
<item>beak, bik
<item>beams, bims
<item>bean, bin
<item>beast, bist
<item>beat, bit
<item>beaten, bitn
<item>beautiful, bíutiful
<item>beauty, bíuti
<item>beaver, bíver
<item>became, bikéim
<item>because, bicós
<item>become, bik<hi>ó</hi>m
<item>bedroom, bedrúm
<item>bedstead, bedstéd
<item>bee, bí
<item>beech, bich
<item>beef, bif
<item>beefsteak, bifsték
<item>been, bin
<item>beer, bíer
<item>beet, bit
<item>before, bifóur
<item>begin, biguín
<item>begun, big<hi>ó</hi>n
<item>behave, bijéiv
<item>behead, bijéd
<item>behind, bijáind
<item>being, biing
<item>believe, bilív
<item>bellow, bélo
<item>belong, bilóng
<item>beloved, bilóvd
<item>below, bilóu
<item>beneath, biníz
<item>beseech, bisí<hi>ch</hi>
<item>beside, bisáid
<item>besiege, bisích
<item>between, bituín
<pb n=396 id=pb396><item>beware, biuéar
<item>bile, báil
<item>billet, bílet
<item>billiard, bíllard
<item>bind, báind
<item>binnacle, binakel
<item>birch, b<hi>e</hi>rch
<item>bird, b<hi>e</hi>rd
<item>birth, b<hi>e</hi>rz
<item>birthday, b<hi>e</hi>rzdéi
<item>biscuit, bískit
<item>bishop, bí<hi>ch</hi>op
<item>bite, báit
<item>bitten, bitn
<item>blackboard, blakbórd
<item>blacken, blakn
<item>blackmail, blakméil
<item>blade, bléid
<item>blaze<corr>,</corr> bléiz
<item>bleat, blit
<item>bleating, blítin
<item>bleed, blid
<item>blessed, blesd
<item>blew, bliú
<item>blind, bláind
<item>blindness, bláindnes
<item>blood, bl<hi>o</hi>d
<item>bloom, blum
<item>blow, blóu
<item>blue, bliú
<item>blunder, bl<hi>ó</hi>nder
<item>blunt, bl<hi>o</hi>nt
<item>blush, bl<hi>och</hi>
<item>board, boord
<item>boarder, bórder
<item>boast, bóust
<item>boat, bóut
<item>boiled, bóild
<item>bold, bóuld
<item>bondage, bondéi<hi>ch</hi>
<item>bone, bóun
<item>book, buk
<item>bookbinder, bukbáinder
<item>bookcase, bukkéis
<item>bookkeeper, bukkiper
<item>bookseller, bukséler
<item>boom, bum
<item>boot, but
<item>bore, bóer
<item>borrow, bóro
<item>bosom, bús<hi>o</hi>m
<item>bottle, bótel
<item>bottom, b<hi>o</hi>tom
<item>bough, báo
<item>bought, bót
<item>bound, báond
<item>bouquet, bokéi
<item>bowels, báuels
<item>bowsprit, bóusprit
<item>brace, bréis
<item>bracelet, bréislet
<item>brain, bréin
<pb n=397 id=pb397><item>brake, bréik
<item>brave, bréiv
<item>bray, bréi
<item>breach, brich
<item>bread, bred
<item>break, brek
<item>breakfast, brékfast
<item>breaking, bréking
<item>breast, brest
<item>breastpin, bréstpin
<item>breath, brez
<item>breathe, briz
<item>breed, brid
<item>breeze, bris
<item>brewer, brú<hi>e</hi>r
<item>bride, bráid
<item>bridge, bri<hi>ch</hi>
<item>bridle, bráidel
<item>brief, brif
<item>brigade, briguéid
<item>bright, bráit
<item>brilliant, bríllant
<item>brimstone, brimstóun
<item>bristles, brísls
<item>broad, brod
<item>broadside, brodsáid
<item>bronze, brons
<item>brooch, bruch
<item>brook, bruk
<item>broth, broz
<item>brother, br<hi>óde</hi>r
<item>brought, brot
<item>brown, bráon
<item>bruise, briús
<item>brush, br<hi>och</hi>
<item>brute, brut
<item>bud, b<hi>o</hi>d
<item>bugle, b<hi>ó</hi>guel
<item>build, bild
<item><corr sic=bukle>buckle</corr>, b<hi>ó</hi>kel
<item>bulk, b<hi>o</hi>lk
<item>bull, bul
<item>bullet, b<hi>ó</hi>let
<item>bundle, b<hi>o</hi>ndel
<item>bureau, bíuro
<item><corr sic=burgundi>burgundy</corr>, b<hi>ó</hi>rgondi
<item>burial, bérial
<item>burn, b<hi>o</hi>rn
<item>burst, b<hi>o</hi>rst
<item>bury, béri
<item>business, bísnes
<item>busy, bísi
<item>but, b<hi>o</hi>t
<item>butcher, búcher
<item>butter, b<hi>ó</hi>ter
<item>butterfly, b<hi>ó</hi>t<hi>e</hi>rflai
<item>button, b<hi>ó</hi>tn
<item>buy, bái
<item>buzzing, b<hi>ó</hi>sin


<item>Cabbage, cábei<hi>ch</hi>
<item>cable, kéibel
<item>cage, kéi<hi>ch</hi>
<pb n=398 id=pb398><item>cake, kéik
<item>cackle, cákel
<item>calculate, calkiuléit
<item>calf, kaf
<item><corr sic=calker>caulker</corr>, cóker
<item>call, col
<item>calling, cólin
<item>calm, cam
<item>cambric, kémbric
<item>came, keim
<item>campaign, campéin
<item>camphor, cánfor
<item>canary, canéri
<item>cancel, cánsel
<item>cancer, cánser
<item>candle, cándel
<item>cane, kéin
<item>cannon, cánon
<item>cap, cap
<item>capable, kéipebel
<item>capitulate, capitiuléit
<item>captain, cáptin
<item>care, kéar
<item>careless, kéarles
<item>carmine, carmáin
<item>carriage, cárie<hi>ch</hi>
<item>carries, cáris
<item>carrot, cárot
<item>carry, cári
<item><corr sic=cartouch>cartouche</corr>, cartú<hi>ch</hi>
<item>cartridge, cártri<hi>ch</hi>
<item>case, kéis
<item>cash, ca<hi>ch</hi>
<item>cassia, ca<hi>ch</hi>ia
<item>castle, cásel
<item>cathedral, cazídral
<item>catholic, cázolic
<item>cattle, cátel
<item>caught, cot
<item>cauliflower, colifláuer
<item>cause, cos
<item>cautious, có<hi>ch</hi>os
<item>cease, sis
<item><corr sic=cedear>cedar</corr>, sídar
<item>ceiling, sílin
<item>celebrate, selebréit
<item>celebration, selebré<hi>che</hi>n
<item>celery, séleri
<item>cellar, sélar
<item>cemetery, sémit<hi>e</hi>ri
<item>cent, sent
<item>centre, sénter
<item>century<corr>,</corr> sén<hi>ch</hi>iuri
<item>ceremony, sérimoni
<item>certain, s<hi>é</hi>rtin
<item>certificate, sertífikeit
<item>cession, sé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>chain, chéin
<item>chair, chéar
<item>chalice, chális
<item>chalk, chok
<item>chamber, chémb<hi>e</hi>r
<pb n=399 id=pb399><item>champagne, champéin
<item>chance, chans
<item>change, chéin<hi>ch</hi>
<item>chaplain, cháplin
<item>character, cáracter
<item>charcoal, charcóul
<item>charge, charch
<item>charitable, cháritabel
<item>chase, chéis
<item>chasuble, chásiubel
<item>cheat, chit
<item><corr sic=cheeck>cheek</corr>, chik
<item>cheese, chis
<item>chemical, kémical
<item>cherry, chéri
<item>chief, chif
<item>child, cháild
<item>childhood, cháiljud
<item>children, chíldren
<item>chilly, chíli
<item>chimney, chímni
<item>china, cháina
<item>chirping, ch<hi>é</hi>rpin
<item>chocolate, chócolet
<item>choice, chóis
<item>choir, kúair
<item>choose, chus
<item>Christ, cráist
<item>christian, crístian
<item>christmas, crísmas
<item>church, ch<hi>e</hi>rch
<item>cider, sáider
<item>cigar, sigár
<item>cigarette, sigarét
<item>cinnamon, sínamon
<item>circulation, s<hi>e</hi>rkiulé<hi>che</hi>n
<item>citizen, sítisen
<item>city, síti
<item>civil, sívil
<item>claim, cléim
<item>claw, clo
<item>clay, cléi
<item>clean, clin
<item>clear, clíer
<item>cleave, cliv
<item>climate, cláimet
<item>climb, cláim
<item>cloak, clóuk
<item>clock, clok
<item>close, clóus
<item>cloth, cloz
<item>clothes, clózes
<item>cloud, cláod
<item>cloves, clovs
<item>coach, cóuch
<item>coal, cóul
<item>coarse, cóurs
<item>coast, cóust
<item>coat, cóut
<item>cocoa, cóco
<item>coffee, cófi
<item>cognac, coñác
<pb n=400 id=pb400><item>cold, cóuld
<item>collar, cólar
<item>collection, coléc<hi>che</hi>n
<item>college, cóle<hi>ch</hi>
<item>colonel, k<hi>é</hi>rnel
<item><corr sic=columm>column</corr>, cól<hi>o</hi>n
<item>comb, cóum
<item>combine, combáin
<item>come, c<hi>o</hi>m
<item>command, cománd
<item>commence, cómens
<item>commerce, cómers
<item>commission, comí<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>complain, compléin
<item>complete, complít
<item>completely, complítli
<item>complexion, complé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>composer, compóuser
<item>composition, composí<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>compromise, compromáis
<item>conceive, consív
<item>concert, cónsert
<item>concession, consé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>conclude, concliúd
<item>condition, condí<hi>che</hi>n
<item>conductor, cond<hi>é</hi>ctor
<item>confectionery, confé<hi>cho</hi>neri
<item>confirm, conf<hi>é</hi>rm
<item>congratulate, congrá<hi>chi</hi>ulet
<item>conjugation, conyugué<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>conscience, cón<hi>chi</hi>ens
<item>consign, consáin
<item>consul, cóns<hi>o</hi>l
<item>consult, cons<hi>ó</hi>lt
<item>consumption, cons<hi>ó</hi>n<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>conversation, conversé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>coo, cu
<item>cook, cuk
<item>cool, cul
<item>cooper, cúper
<item>copy-book, copi-búk
<item>corkscrew, córkskriu
<item>costume, costiúm
<item>cotton, c<hi>ó</hi>ton
<item>cough, cof
<item>could, cud
<item>council, cáunsil
<item>counsel, cáunsel
<item>count, cáunt
<item>counter, cáunter
<item>countermine, cáuntermain
<item>countersign, cáuntersain
<item>country, c<hi>ó</hi>ntri
<item>coupe, cupé
<item>coupons, cúpons
<pb n=401 id=pb401><item>courage, c<hi>ó</hi>ri<hi>ch</hi>
<item>course, cors
<item>court, cort
<item>cousin, c<hi>ó</hi>sin
<item>cow, cáu
<item>coward, cáuard
<item>cradle, créidel
<item>cranage, cránei<hi>ch</hi>
<item>crane, créin
<item>crape, créip
<item>crazy, crési
<item>cream, crim
<item>crew, criú
<item>crime, cráim
<item>croak, cróuk
<item>crocodile, crócodail
<item>crow, cróu
<item>crowd, cráud
<item>crown, cráun
<item>crucifix, crúsifix
<item>cruel, criúel
<item>cruise, crus
<item>cry, crái
<item>cucumber, kiuc<hi>ó</hi>mb<hi>e</hi>r
<item>cue, kiú
<item>cuff, c<hi>o</hi>f
<item>cull, c<hi>o</hi>l
<item>cultivate, c<hi>ó</hi>ltiveit
<item>culture, c<hi>ó</hi>l<hi>ch</hi>iur
<item>cup, c<hi>o</hi>p
<item>cure, kiúr
<item>curl, c<hi>o</hi>rl
<item>currency, c<hi>ó</hi>rensi
<item>current, c<hi>o</hi>rent
<item>curse, c<hi>o</hi>rs
<item>curtain, c<hi>ó</hi>rtin
<item>customer, c<hi>ó</hi>st<hi>o</hi>mer
<item>custom-house, c<hi>ó</hi>st<hi>o</hi>m-jaus
<item>cut, c<hi>o</hi>t
<item>cutlet, c<hi>ó</hi>tlet


<item>Dace, déis
<item>daily, déili
<item>daisy, déisi
<item>damage, dámi<hi>ch</hi>
<item>dance, dans
<item>dancer, dánser
<item>dancing, dánsin
<item>danger, dény<hi>e</hi>r
<item>dapple, dápel
<item>dare, déar
<item>date, déit
<item>daughter, dót<hi>e</hi>r
<item>dawn, don
<item>day, déi
<item><corr sic=daybreack>daybreak</corr>, déibrek
<item>daylight, deiláit
<item>deacon, dícon
<item>dead, ded
<item>deaf, def
<item>deal, dil
<item>dean, din
<item>dear, díer
<pb n=402 id=pb402><item>death, dez
<item>debt, det
<item>decay, dikéi
<item>deceive, disív
<item>december, disémber
<item>decides, disáids
<item>decimo, désimo
<item>declare, dicléar
<item>decline, dicláin
<item>decrease, dicrís
<item>dedicate, dedikéit
<item>deduct, did<hi>ó</hi>ct
<item>deem, dim
<item>deep, dip
<item>deer, díer
<item>defeat, difít
<item>defence, diféns
<item>defend, difénd
<item>defer, dif<hi>é</hi>r
<item>defile, difáil
<item>degree, digrí
<item>delay, diléi
<item>delicious, delí<hi>cho</hi>s
<item>delight, diláit
<item>delude, diliud
<item>deluge, diliú<hi>ch</hi>
<item>demand, dimánd
<item>deny, dinái
<item>depart, dipárt
<item>department, dipártment
<item>departure, dipártchiur
<item>depend, dipénd
<item>deprave, dipréiv
<item>deprecate, díprikeit
<item>depredate, díprideit
<item>deprive, dipráiv
<item>depute, dipiút
<item>deride, diráid
<item>derision, dirí<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>derive, diráiv
<item>derogate, dírogueit
<item>descend, desénd
<item>describe, discráib
<item>description, discríp<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>descry, discrái
<item>desert, dés<hi>e</hi>rt
<item><corr sic=desing>design</corr>, disáin
<item>desire, disáir
<item>desolate, dísoleit
<item>despatch, dispách
<item>desperate, dispiréit
<item>despise, dispáis
<item>despite, dispáit
<item>detail, ditéil
<item><corr sic="detéctiv">detective</corr>, ditéctiv
<item>dew, díu
<item>dial, dáial
<item>diamond, dáiamond
<item>dice, dáis
<item>dictation, dicté<hi>che</hi>n
<item>dictionary, díc<hi>cho</hi>neri
<item>die, dái
<pb n=403 id=pb403><item>diet, dáiet
<item>difference, díferens
<item>difficult, dífic<hi>o</hi>lt
<item>digestion, diyéchion
<item>dike, dáik
<item>diligence, díligens
<item>dine, dáin
<item>dinner, díner
<item>direction, diréc<hi>che</hi>n
<item>dirty, d<hi>é</hi>rti
<item>disagreeable, disagríabel
<item>disappear, disapíer
<item><corr sic=disaprove>disapprove</corr>, disaprúv
<item>discount, discáunt
<item>disease, disís
<item>disgrace, disgréis
<item>disgust, disg<hi>ó</hi>st
<item>dislike, disláik
<item>display, displéi
<item>dispose, dispóus
<item>dispute, dispiút
<item>distance, dístans
<item>distribute, distríbiut
<item>disturb, dist<hi>o</hi>rb
<item>do, du
<item>doctor, d<hi>ó</hi>ct<hi>o</hi>r
<item>does, d<hi>o</hi>s
<item>doing, dúin
<item>dollar, dólar
<item>done, d<hi>o</hi>n
<item>doer, dó<hi>e</hi>r
<item>dotage, dotéich
<item>double, dóbel
<item>doubt, dáut
<item>dove, d<hi>o</hi>v
<item>down, dáun
<item>drapery, dréperi
<item>draught, draft
<item>dread, dred
<item>dream, drim
<item>drew, driu
<item>drive, dráiv
<item>driver, dráiver
<item>drug, dr<hi>o</hi>g
<item>drum, dr<hi>o</hi>m
<item>drunk, dr<hi>o</hi>nk
<item>dry, drái
<item>duck, d<hi>o</hi>k
<item>due, diú
<item>duke, diúk
<item>dull, d<hi>o</hi>l
<item>dumb, d<hi>o</hi>m
<item>durable, diúrabel
<item>dust, d<hi>e</hi>st
<item>duty, diúti
<item>dye, dái
<item>dyer, dáier



<item>Each, ich
<item>eagle, íg<hi>o</hi>l
<item>ear, íar<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>early, érli
<item>earth, erz
<pb n=404 id=pb404><item>ease, iis
<item><corr sic=easely>easily</corr>, ísli
<item>east, ist
<item>easy, ísi
<item>eat, it
<item>echo, éco
<item>eclipse, éclips
<item>edge, e<hi>ch</hi>
<item>edition, edí<hi>che</hi>n
<item>educate, ediukéit
<item>eel, iil
<item>efficacy, éficasi
<item>egg, eg
<item>eight, éit
<item>eighth, éitz
<item>either, i<hi>d</hi>er
<item>elbow, élbo
<item>elegance, éligans
<item>elephant, élefant
<item>eleven, iléven
<item>else, els
<item>empire, empáier
<item>enable, inéibel
<item>enclose, enclóus
<item>endive, endáiv
<item>endorse, endórs
<item>engage, engu<hi>é</hi>ich
<item>engine, enyín
<item>engineer, enyiníer
<item>england, ingland
<item>english, ingli<hi>ch</hi>
<item>engraver, engréiv<hi>e</hi>r
<item>enjoy, enyói
<item>enough, ináf
<item>ensign, ensáin
<item>enterprise, ent<hi>e</hi>rpráis
<item>entire, entáier
<item>entitled, entáitled
<item>entreat, entrít
<item>envelope, énvelop
<item>equal, ícual
<item>error, éror
<item>eruption, er<hi>ó</hi>p<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>escape<corr>,</corr> eskéip
<item>esquire, escuáier
<item>essential, esen<hi>ch</hi>al
<item>estate, estéit<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>esteem, estím
<item>ether, ízer
<item>eve, iiv
<item>even, íven
<item>evening, ívnin
<item>event, ívent
<item>ever, évar
<item>every, éveri
<item>evidence, évidens
<item>evil, ívil
<item>ewe, iú
<item>example, exámpel
<item>exceed, exsíd
<item>excellent, ékselent
<item>except, eksépt
<pb n=405 id=pb405><item>exchange, exchéin<hi>ch</hi>
<item>excuse, exkiús
<item>execute, eksékiut
<item>exercise, exersáis
<item>exhibition, exibí<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>expire, expáier
<item>explains, expléins
<item>expose, expóus
<item>extinguish, extíngüis
<item>eye, ái
<item>eyeball, aiból
<item>eyebrow, aibráu
<item>eyelash, ailá<hi>ch</hi>

<item>Face, féis
<item>faculties, fác<hi>o</hi>ltis
<item>fail, féil
<item>failure, félior<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>faint, féint<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>fair, féar
<item>faith, féiz
<item>fall, fol
<item>false, fols
<item>fame, féim
<item>fancy, fánsi
<item>fare, féar
<item>farewell, fér-uél
<item>farther, fár<hi>de</hi>r
<item>fascine, fasín
<item>fashion, fá<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>father, fá<hi>d</hi>er
<item>fault, folt
<item>favor, féivor
<item>favorable, féivorabel
<item>fear, fier
<item>feast, fist
<item>feather, fé<hi>d</hi>er
<item>feature, fi<hi>cho</hi>r
<item>february, fébrueri
<item>feed, fid
<item>feel, fil
<item>feeling, fílin
<item>felloes, félos
<item>fellow, félou
<item>female, fímeil
<item>fence, fens
<item>fever, fíver
<item>few, fiú
<item>field, fild
<item>fifteen, fíftin
<item>fifth, fifz
<item>fight, fáit
<item>file, fáil
<item>fillet, fílet
<item>find, fáind
<item>fine, fáin
<item>fire, fáier
<item>first, f<hi>e</hi>rst
<item>fistula, fístiula
<item>five, fáiv
<item>flame, fléim
<item>flatter, flát<hi>e</hi>r
<item>flea, fli
<pb n=406 id=pb406><item>flee, fli
<item>float, flóut
<item>flood, fl<hi>o</hi>d
<item>floor, fló<hi>e</hi>r
<item>flour, fláuer
<item>flowing, flóuin
<item>flute, flíut
<item>flux, fl<hi>o</hi>x
<item>fly, flái
<item>foggy, fógui
<item>fold, fóuld
<item>follow, fólo
<item>food, fud
<item>fool, ful
<item>foot, fut
<item>force, fors
<item>forehead, fórjed
<item>forenoon, fórnun
<item>foreyard, fóryard
<item>fortnight, fornáit
<item>forward, fóruard
<item>fought, fot
<item>found, fáund
<item>fountain, fáontin
<item>four, fó<hi>e</hi>r
<item>fraud, frod
<item>fray, fréi
<item>free, fri
<item>freeze, fris
<item>friar, fraiar
<item>fricassee, fricasí
<item>friday, fráidei
<item>friend, frend
<item>frigate, frígueit
<item>fright, fráit
<item>frock-coat, frockóut
<item>frozen, frosn
<item>fruit, frut
<item>fry, frái
<item>fuel, fíuel
<item>fulfil, f<hi>ol</hi>fil
<item>fur, f<hi>o</hi>r
<item>furniture, fórni<hi>cho</hi>r
<item>further, f<hi>ó</hi>rder
<item>fury, fiúri
<item>future, fiú<hi>cho</hi>r



<item>Gain, guéin
<item>gall, gol
<item>gallery, gáleri
<item>game, guéim
<item>gangrene, gangrín
<item>garret, gáret
<item>gate, guéit
<item>gather, gá<hi>de</hi>r
<item>gauze, gos
<item>gave, guéiv
<item>gay, guéi
<item>gem, yem
<item>gender, yénder
<item>general, yéneral
<item>generous, yéneros
<item>genitive, yénitiv
<pb n=407 id=pb407><item>gentle, yéntel
<item>gentleman, yéntelman
<item>germ, yerm
<item>german, yérman
<item>get, guet
<item>gift, guift
<item>gill, guil
<item>gin, yin
<item>girl, gu<hi>e</hi>rl
<item>give, guiv
<item>given, guivn
<item>glazed, gléisd
<item>gloomy, glúmi
<item>glove, gl<hi>o</hi>v
<item>glue, gliú
<item>go, góu
<item>goat, góut
<item>gold, góuld
<item>gone, g<hi>o</hi>n
<item>good, gud
<item>good-bye, gudbái
<item>goods, guds
<item>gooseberry, gúsberi
<item>gout, gáut
<item>gown, gáun
<item>grace, gréis
<item>grain, gréin
<item>grammar, grámar
<item>grape, gréip
<item>grate, gréit
<item>gratitude, grátitiud
<item>grave, gréiv
<item>gravy, grévi
<item>gray, gréi
<item>gridiron, gridáiron
<item>grief, grif
<item>grind, gráind
<item>grocery, gróseri
<item>groom, grum
<item>ground, gráund
<item>grow, gróu
<item>grunt, gr<hi>o</hi>nt
<item>guard, gard
<item>guess, gues
<item>guide, gáid
<item>gum, g<hi>o</hi>m
<item>gun, g<hi>o</hi>n



<item>Habit, jábit
<item>hackney, jákni
<item>hail, jéil
<item>hair, jéar
<item>hair-brush, jearbr<hi>ó</hi>ch
<item>half, jaf
<item>hall, jol
<item>halter, jólter
<item>ham, jam
<item>hammer, jámer
<item>hand, jand
<item>handkerchief, jánkerchif
<item>handle, jándel
<item>handsome, jánds<hi>o</hi>m
<pb n=408 id=pb408><item>hang, jang
<item>happen, japn
<item>happy, jápi
<item>harbor, jarb<hi>o</hi>r
<item>hare, jéar
<item>harm, jarm
<item>harness, járnes
<item>harpoon, jarpún
<item>harrow, járo
<item>haste, jéist
<item>hasten, jéisn
<item>hatchet, játchet
<item>hatter, játer
<item>haul, jol
<item>have, jav
<item>hay, jéi
<item>hazel, jéisel
<item>he, ji
<item>head, jed
<item>headstall, jedstól
<item>health, jelz
<item>healthy, jélzi
<item>hear, jíer
<item>heard, j<hi>e</hi>rd
<item>hearing, jíerin
<item>heart, jart
<item>hearth, jarz
<item>heat, jit
<item>heaven, jéven
<item>heavy, jévy
<item>heel, jiil
<item><corr sic=heigt>height</corr>, jáit
<item>her, j<hi>e</hi>r
<item>here, jíer
<item>hide, jáid
<item>high, jái
<item>hind, jáind
<item>hire, jáier
<item>hoarse, jors
<item>hoe, jóu
<item>hold, jóuld
<item>holder, jóulder
<item>hole, jóul
<item>holiday, jólidei
<item>home, jóum
<item>homicide, jómisaid
<item>honest, ónest
<item>honesty, ónesti
<item>honey, jóni
<item>honor, ónor
<item>hood, jud
<item>hoof, juf
<item>hope, jóup
<item>horse, jors
<item>hospital, óspital
<item>hound, jáund
<item>hour, áuer
<item>house, jáus
<item>how, jáu
<item>howl, jáol
<item>hull, j<hi>o</hi>l
<item><corr sic=humiditi>humidity</corr>, jiumíditi
<pb n=409 id=pb409><item>humility, jiumíliti
<item>humor, jíumor
<item>hump, j<hi>e</hi>mp
<item>hundred, j<hi>é</hi>ndred
<item>hunger, j<hi>é</hi>nguer
<item>hungry, j<hi>é</hi>ngri
<item>hunt, j<hi>o</hi>nt
<item>hurry, j<hi>ó</hi>ri
<item>hurt, j<hi>o</hi>rt
<item>husband, j<hi>é</hi>sband
<item>hyacinth, jáiacint
<item>hyena, jaína


<item>I, ái
<item>ice, áis
<item>ice-cream, aiscrím
<item>ice-water, áis-uót<hi>e</hi>r
<item>idea, aidía
<item>idle, áidel
<item>illusion, ilíu<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>image, íma<hi>ch</hi>
<item>imagination, imayiné<hi>che</hi>n
<item>imitate, imitéit
<item>immediate, inmídiet
<item>impair, impéar
<item>impartial, impár<hi>ch</hi>al
<item>impatience, impé<hi>ch</hi>ens
<item>impious, ínpi<hi>o</hi>s
<item>impolite, impoláit
<item>importation<corr>,</corr> importé<hi>che</hi>n
<item>impose, impóus
<item>impossible, impósibel
<item>improve, imprúv
<item>incense, ínsens
<item><corr sic=inciviliti>incivility</corr>, insivíliti
<item>incline, incláin
<item>include, incliúd
<item>inconvenient, inconvínient
<item>increase, incrís
<item>indeed, indíd
<item>indemnify, indémnifai
<item>indicate, indikéit
<item>indigestion, indiyés<hi>che</hi>n
<item>indispose, indispóus
<item>infancy, ínfansi
<item>inquire, incuáier
<item>inside, insáid
<item>inspection, inspé<hi>che</hi>n
<item>institute, ínstitiut
<item>instruction, instr<hi>ó</hi>c<hi>che</hi>n
<item>insufficient, insofí<hi>ch</hi>en
<item>insurance, in<hi>ch</hi>úrans
<item>intelligence, intéliyens
<item>intense, intens
<item>introduce, introdíus
<item>invade, invéid
<item>invite, inváit
<item>invoice, invóis
<item>iron, ái<hi>o</hi>rn
<item>island, áiland
<item>issue, íschiu
<pb n=410 id=pb410><item>ivory, áivori
<item>ivy, áivi

<item>Jail, yéil
<item>jaws, yos
<item>jest, yest
<item>jew, yiú
<item>jewel, yúel
<item>join, yoin
<item>journal, y<hi>ó</hi>rnal
<item>joy, yói
<item>judge, y<hi>ech</hi>
<item>july, yulái
<item>june, yiún
<item>juror, yúror
<item>jury, yiúri
<item>justice, y<hi>ó</hi>stis



<item>Keel, kil
<item>keep, kip
<item>kettle, kétel
<item>key, ki
<item>kidney, kídni
<item>killed, kild
<item>kindle, kíndel
<item>kite, cáit
<item>knee, ni
<item>kneel, nil
<item>knife<corr>,</corr> náif
<item>knives, náivs
<item>know, nóu
<item>knowledge, nóle<hi>ch</hi>



<item>Labor, léib<hi>o</hi>r
<item>lace, léis
<item>lade, leid
<item>lady, lédi
<item>lake, léik
<item>lamb, lam
<item>lame, léim
<item>lance, lans
<item>lane, léin
<item>language, lángui<hi>ch</hi>
<item>larboard, lárboord
<item>large, lar<hi>ch</hi>
<item>late, léit
<item>lathe, léiz
<item><corr sic=laught>laugh</corr>, laf
<item>laughter, láfter
<item>launch, lanch
<item>laundress, lándres
<item>laundry, lándri
<item><corr sic=laured>laurel</corr>, lórel
<item>law, lo
<item>lawn, lon
<item>lawyer, lóier
<item>lay, léi
<item>lazy, lési
<item>leaf, lif
<item>league, lig
<item>leap, lip
<item>learn, l<hi>e</hi>rn
<item>lease, lis
<item>least, list
<item>leather, lé<hi>d</hi>er
<pb n=411 id=pb411><item>leave, liv
<item>ledger, lédyer
<item>leech, lich
<item>legal, lígal
<item>leisure, lí<hi>che</hi>r
<item>lesson, lés<hi>e</hi>n
<item>letter, léter
<item>lettuce, létis
<item>liable, láiabel
<item>library, láibreri
<item>lie, lái
<item>lieutenant, liuténant
<item>like, láik
<item>likeness, láiknes
<item>line, láin
<item>linen, línen
<item>linseed, linsíd
<item>lion, láion
<item>liquor, lík<hi>o</hi>r
<item>listen, lisn
<item>little, lítel
<item>live, liv
<item>lively, láivli
<item>lizard, lísard
<item>load, lóud
<item>loan, lóun
<item>locust, lóc<hi>o</hi>st
<item>lodge, lo<hi>ch</hi>
<item>logwood, logúud
<item>look, luk
<item>looking-glass, lúkinglas
<item>lose, lús
<item>loud, láud
<item>louse, láus
<item>love, l<hi>o</hi>v
<item>lovely, l<hi>ó</hi>vli
<item>low, lóu
<item>lunch, l<hi>o</hi>nch
<item>lungs, l<hi>o</hi>ngs
<item>lute, liút
<item>lying, láin



<item>Machine, mac<hi>ch</hi>in
<item>made, méid
<item>magazine, magazín
<item>magpie, magpái
<item>mahogany, majógani
<item>mahometan, majómetan
<item>mail, méil
<item>main, méin
<item>majesty, máyesti
<item>major, méiy<hi>o</hi>r
<item>make, méik
<item>maker, méker
<item>male, méil
<item>malmsey, mámsi
<item>manage, máne<hi>ch</hi>
<item>mane, méin
<item>manhood, mánjud
<item>maniple, mánipel
<item>manner, mán<hi>e</hi>r
<item>mantle, mántel
<item>manure, maniúr
<pb n=412 id=pb412><item>many, méni
<item>maple, méipel
<item>marble, márbel
<item>mare, méar
<item>margin, máryin
<item>masculine, máskiulin
<item>mason, méison
<item>matches, máches
<item>mate, méit
<item>matter, mát<hi>e</hi>r
<item><corr sic=maturiti>maturity</corr>, machúriti
<item>may, méi
<item>me, mi
<item>meal, mil
<item>mean, min
<item>measles, mísles
<item>medicine, médicin
<item>meet, mit
<item>meeting, mítin
<item>merchandise, mérchandais
<item>mercury, mérkiuri
<item>mercy, m<hi>é</hi>rsi
<item>merry, méri
<item>methodist, mézodist
<item>mewing<corr>,</corr> míuin
<item>mews, míus
<item>middle, mídel
<item>midnight, midnáit
<item>might, máit
<item>mild, máild
<item>mile<corr>,</corr> máil
<item>milliner, míliner
<item>mind, máind
<item>mine, máin
<item>minute, mín<hi>e</hi>t
<item>mirror, míror
<item>misfortune, misfórch<hi>o</hi>n
<item>mistake, mistéik
<item>mistress<corr>,</corr> <corr sic="míses">místres</corr>
<item>mole, móul
<item>monday, m<hi>ó</hi>ndei
<item>money, m<hi>ó</hi>ni
<item>monkey, mónki
<item>month, monz
<item>mood, mud
<item>moon, mun
<item>more, móur
<item>mosquito, móskito
<item>most, móust
<item>mother, mod<hi>e</hi>r
<item>motive, móutiv
<item>mouse, máus
<item>moustache, musta<hi>ch</hi>
<item>mouth, máuz
<item>move, muv
<item>mow, móu
<item>much, m<hi>o</hi>ch
<item>mud, m<hi>o</hi>d
<item>muff, m<hi>o</hi>f
<item>mule, miúl
<item>murder, m<hi>e</hi>rder
<pb n=413 id=pb413><item><corr sic="muskle">muscle</corr>, <corr sic="moskel">m<hi>o</hi>sel</corr>
<item>museum, miusíon
<item>music, míusik
<item>muslin, m<hi>o</hi>slin
<item>must, m<hi>e</hi>st
<item>mustard, m<hi>o</hi>stard
<item>mutton, m<hi>ó</hi>ton
<item>my, mái

<item>Nail, néil
<item>name, néim
<item>nape, néip
<item>narrow, náro
<item>native, nétiv
<item>natural, náchiural
<item>naughty, nóti
<item>nave, néiv
<item>navy, névi
<item>near, níar
<item>neat, nit
<item>necessary, nésesari
<item>necklace, nékleis
<item>necktie, nektái
<item>needle, nídel
<item>neglect, nigléct
<item>neighbor, néibor
<item>neither, ní<hi>de</hi>r
<item>nephew, néfiu
<item>nerve, n<hi>e</hi>rv
<item>never, név<hi>e</hi>r
<item>new, niú
<item>newspaper, niuspéip<hi>e</hi>r
<item>nice, náis
<item>niece, nis
<item>night, náit
<item>nine, náin
<item>nineteen, náintin
<item>noble, nóbel
<item>noise, nóis
<item>none, n<hi>o</hi>n
<item>noon, nun
<item>north, norz
<item>nose, nóus
<item>note, nóut
<item>nothing, n<hi>ó</hi>zin
<item>notice, nótis
<item>noun, náun
<item>now, náu
<item>number, n<hi>o</hi>mber
<item>nun, n<hi>o</hi>n
<item>nurse, n<hi>o</hi>rs
<item>nut, n<hi>o</hi>t


<item>Oak, óuk
<item>oats, óuts
<item>obedient, obídient
<item>object, óbyect
<item>obligation, obligué<hi>ch</hi>en
<item>oblige, obláich
<item>obscure, obskíuer
<item>observe, obs<hi>é</hi>rv
<item>obstacle, <corr sic="ôbstakel">óbstakel</corr>
<item>obtain, obtéin
<item>occasion, oké<hi>che</hi>n
<pb n=414 id=pb414><item>occupy, okiupái
<item>occur, ok<hi>ó</hi>r
<item>ocean, ó<hi>ch</hi>ean
<item>odious, ódi<hi>o</hi>s
<item>of, ov
<item>off, of
<item>offense, oféns
<item>office, ófis
<item>often, ófen
<item>old, óuld
<item>olive, óliv
<item>once, uóns
<item>one, uón
<item>onion, óñon
<item>open, ópn
<item>opera, ópira
<item>opium, ópi<hi>o</hi>n
<item>opportunity, oportiúniti
<item>oppose, opóus
<item>opposite, óposit
<item>orange, oran<hi>ch</hi>
<item>oration, oréi<hi>che</hi>n
<item>orchard, ór<hi>cho</hi>rd
<item>orchestra, órkestra
<item>organise, órganais
<item>orifice, órifis
<item>original, oríyinal
<item>ornate, órneit
<item>orphan, órfan
<item>oscillate, ósileit
<item>ossify, ósifai
<item>ostensible, osténsibel
<item>ostentation, ostente<hi>che</hi>n
<item>other, oz<hi>e</hi>r
<item>ought, ot
<item>ounce, auns
<item>our, áuer
<item>out, áut
<item>outdo, autdú
<item>outgrow, autgróu
<item>outhouse, áutjaus
<item>outlaw, áutlo
<item>outlay, áutlei
<item>outside, áutsaid
<item>ovation, ovéi<hi>che</hi>n
<item>over, óv<hi>e</hi>r
<item>overcome, overc<hi>ó</hi>m
<item>overlay, ov<hi>e</hi>rléi
<item>overlook, ov<hi>e</hi>rlúk
<item>oversee, ov<hi>e</hi>rsí
<item>overtake, ov<hi>e</hi>rtéik
<item>owe, ou
<item>owl, ául
<item>own, óun
<item>owner, ón<hi>e</hi>r
<item>oyster, oíst<hi>e</hi>r



<item>Pace, péis
<item>pacify, pásifai
<item>pagan, péigan
<item>page, péi<hi>ch</hi>
<item>pail, péil
<item>pain, péin
<pb n=415 id=pb415><item>paint, péint
<item>pair, péar
<item>palace, páleis
<item>palate, páleit
<item>pale, péil
<item>palfrey, pálfri
<item>pall, pol
<item>palm, pam
<item>palpitate, pálpiteit
<item>palsy, pólsi
<item>pamphlet, pámflet
<item>pane, péin
<item>pantaloon, pantalón
<item>papal, péipal
<item>paper, péip<hi>e</hi>r
<item>parade, paréid
<item>paradise, páradais
<item>paralyse, páralais
<item>paralysis, parálisis
<item>parasite, párasait
<item>parcel, pársel
<item>pardon, pardn
<item>pare, péir
<item>parent, péirent
<item>parish, pári<hi>ch</hi>
<item>parley, párli
<item>parliament, párliment
<item>parlor, párl<hi>o</hi>r
<item>parricide, párisaid
<item>parrot, párot
<item>parsley, pársli
<item>partake, partéik
<item>partial, pár<hi>ch</hi>al
<item>participate, partísipeit
<item>particle, pártikel
<item>particular, partíkiular
<item>partition, <corr sic="pagtíchen">partí<hi>che</hi>n</corr>
<item>paschal, páscal
<item>passable, pásabel
<item>passenger, páseny<hi>e</hi>r
<item>passion, pá<hi>ch</hi>on
<item>passive, pásiv
<item>paste, péist
<item>pastime, pástaim
<item>patentee, patentí
<item>path, paz
<item>patience, péi<hi>ch</hi>ens
<item>patient, péi<hi>ch</hi>ent
<item>patriarch, pétriark
<item>patron, péitron
<item>pause, pos
<item>paw, po
<item>pawn, pon
<item>pay, péi
<item>pea, pi
<item>peace, pis
<item>peach, pich
<item>peacock, pícok
<item>pear, péir
<item>peasant, pésant
<item>pedal, pídal
<item>peel, pil
<pb n=416 id=pb416><item>peep, pip
<item>peer, pir
<item>penance, pénans
<item>pence, pens
<item>pencil, pénsil
<item>pendulum, péndiul<hi>o</hi>m
<item>peninsula, penínsiula
<item>penitential, peniténchal
<item>penknife, pén-naiv
<item>pension, pén<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>people, pípel
<item>pepper, pép<hi>e</hi>r
<item>perceive, persív
<item>perception, persep<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>perdition, perdi<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>perfume, p<hi>é</hi>rfium
<item>period, píriod
<item>perish, péri<hi>ch</hi>
<item>permission, p<hi>é</hi>rmi<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>perpetrate, p<hi>é</hi>rpetreit
<item>perquisite, p<hi>é</hi>rcuisit
<item>personify, p<hi>é</hi>rsonifai
<item>perspire, perspáier
<item>persuade, persuéid
<item>pestilence, péstilens
<item>petition, peti<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>petrify, pétrifai
<item>petticoat, péticout
<item>pew, piú
<item>phare, fear
<item>pharmacy, fármasi
<item>philology, filóloyi
<item>philosophy, filósoufi
<item>phlegm, flem
<item>photograph, fótograf
<item>phthisis, tísis
<item>physician, fisí<hi>ch</hi>an
<item>pickle, píkel
<item>picture, picch<hi>o</hi>r
<item>pie, pái
<item>piece, pis
<item>pierce, pirs
<item>piety, páieti
<item>pigeon, píye<hi>o</hi>n
<item>pig-sty, pígstai
<item>pike, páik
<item>pile, páil
<item>pillow, pílou
<item>pilot, páilot
<item>pimple<corr>,</corr> pímpel
<item>pincers, píns<hi>e</hi>rs
<item>pine, páin
<item>pious, páius
<item>pipe, páip
<item>piracy, páirasi
<item>pirate, páireit
<item>pity, píti
<item>place, pléis
<item>plague, pléig
<item>plain, plein
<item>plait, pléit
<item>plate, pléit
<pb n=417 id=pb417><item>plausible, plósibel
<item>play, pléi
<item>play-house, pléi-jaus
<item>plea, pli
<item>pleasant, plísant
<item>please, plis
<item>pleasure, pli<hi>che</hi>r
<item>plough, pláu
<item>plumb, pl<hi>o</hi>m
<item>plume, plum
<item>ply, plái
<item>pocket, póket
<item>poesy, póuesi
<item>poison, póison
<item>pole, póul
<item>policeman, pólisman
<item>polite, poláit
<item>politic, polítik
<item>poll, pol
<item>poniard, poñard
<item>pool, pul
<item>poop, pup
<item>poor, pú<hi>e</hi>r
<item>pope, póup
<item>populate, pópiuleit
<item>porter, pórter
<item>portion, por<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>portray, pórtrei
<item>position, posí<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>possession, posé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>possible, pósibel
<item>postage, póstei<hi>ch</hi>
<item>post-office, póst-ofis
<item>posture, pósch<hi>o</hi>r
<item>potato, potéito
<item>potion, pó<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>potter, pót<hi>e</hi>r
<item>pound, páund
<item>pour, póur
<item>powder, páud<hi>e</hi>r
<item>power, páu<hi>e</hi>r
<item>practice, práktis
<item>practise, práktis
<item>praise, préis
<item>pray, préi
<item>preach, prich
<item>preacher, prích<hi>e</hi>r
<item>precaution, precó<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>precede, presíd
<item>precious, pré<hi>cho</hi>s
<item>precise, presáis
<item>predicate, prédikeit
<item>preface, préfeis
<item>prefer, prif<hi>é</hi>r
<item>prelate, préleit
<item>premise, premáis
<item>premium, prími<hi>ó</hi>m
<item>prepare, pripéir
<item>presence, présens
<item>preside, presáid
<item>pretty, príti
<item>prey, préi
<pb n=418 id=pb418><item>price, práis
<item>pride, práid
<item>priest, prist
<item>primacy, práimasi
<item>prime, práim
<item>prince, prins
<item>prior, práior
<item>prison, prisn
<item>private, práiveit
<item>prize, práis
<item>probable, próbabel
<item>proceed, prosíd
<item>proclaim, procléim
<item>produce, prodiús
<item>profane, proféin
<item>profuse, profiús
<item>promenade, prómeneid
<item>promise, prómis
<item>pronounce, pronáuns
<item>pronunciation, pron<hi>o</hi>nsiéi<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>proof, pruf
<item>prophet, prófet
<item>propose, propóus
<item>proprietor, propráiet<hi>o</hi>r
<item>prostrate, próstreit
<item>proud, práud
<item>prove, pruv
<item>provided, prováided
<item>province, próvins
<item>prow, práu
<item>pry, prái
<item>pulse, p<hi>o</hi>ls
<item>punish, p<hi>e</hi>ni<hi>ch</hi>
<item>pup, p<hi>o</hi>p
<item>pupil, piúpil
<item>purchase, p<hi>ó</hi>rcheis
<item>pure, piúr
<item>purple, p<hi>ó</hi>rpel
<item>purpose, p<hi>ó</hi>rpos
<item>purse, p<hi>e</hi>rs
<item>pursue, p<hi>e</hi>rsiú
<item>puzzle, p<hi>ó</hi>sel
<item>pyre, páir



<item>Quail, cuéil
<item>qualify, cuólifai
<item>quality, cuóliti
<item>quantity, cuóntiti
<item>quarrel, cuórel
<item>quarter, cuórt<hi>e</hi>r
<item>quaver, cuéiver
<item>quean, cuín
<item>queen, cuín
<item>query, cuíri
<item>question, cués<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>quiet<corr>,</corr> cuáiet
<item>quinine, cuínain
<item>quire, cuáier
<item>quite, cuáit



<item>Race, réis
<item>racer, réiser
<item>rage, rei<hi>ch</hi>
<pb n=419 id=pb419><item>rail, réil
<item>rain, réin
<item>rainbow, réinbo
<item>rainy, réini
<item>raise, réis
<item>range, réin<hi>ch</hi>
<item>rare, réar
<item>rate, réit
<item>rather, rád<hi>e</hi>r
<item>ravelin, rávlin
<item>raven, réivn
<item>raw, ro
<item>razor, réis<hi>o</hi>r
<item>reach, rich
<item>read, rid
<item>reader, ríd<hi>e</hi>r
<item>readily, rédili
<item>readiness, rédines
<item>reading, rídin
<item>ready, rédi
<item>real, ríal
<item>really, ríali
<item>ream, rim
<item>reap, rip
<item>rear, ríar
<item>reason, ríson
<item>receipt, risít
<item>receive, risív
<item>recover, ricóver
<item>redeemer, ridímer
<item>redoubt, redáut
<item>reduce, ridiús
<item>refer, rif<hi>é</hi>r
<item>refusal, refiúsal
<item>regiment, réyiment
<item>register, réyist<hi>e</hi>r
<item>regret, regrét
<item>reins, réins
<item>relation, relé<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>relieve, relív
<item>rely, relái
<item>remain, riméin
<item>remind, rimáind
<item>remove, rimúv
<item>repair, ripéar
<item>repeat, repít
<item>reply, riplái
<item>report, repórt
<item>repose, ripóus
<item>reptiles, reptáils
<item>request, ricuést
<item>require, ricuáier
<item>resemble, risémbel
<item>resolve, risólv
<item>respect, respéct
<item>retail, ritéil
<item>retreat, ritrít
<item>return, ret<hi>o</hi>rn
<item>revenue, réveniu
<item>reverse, revérs
<item>review, reviú
<item>rheumatism, riúmatism
<pb n=420 id=pb420><item>rhubarb, rúbarb
<item>ribbon, ribn
<item>rice, ráis
<item>rich, rich
<item>ride, ráid
<item>right, ráit
<item>ripe, ráip
<item>rise, ráis
<item>rising, ráisin
<item>road, róud
<item>roast, róust
<item>roast-beef, <corr sic="róustbit">róustbif</corr>
<item>roller, ról<hi>e</hi>r
<item>roof, ruf
<item>rook, ruk
<item>room, rum
<item>root, rut
<item>rope, róup
<item>rose, róus
<item>rough, r<hi>o</hi>f
<item>round, ráund
<item>row, ráu
<item>rubber, r<hi>ó</hi>ber
<item>ruby, riúbi
<item>rule, rul
<item>ruler, rúl<hi>e</hi>r
<item>run, r<hi>o</hi>n
<item>rupture, r<hi>ó</hi>pch<hi>o</hi>r
<item>russia, ró<hi>ch</hi>ia
<item>rye, rái



<item>Sabre, séib<hi>e</hi>r
<item>saddle, sádel
<item>safe, séif
<item>saffron, sáfron
<item>said, sed
<item>sail, séil
<item>sailor, séil<hi>o</hi>r
<item>sale, séil
<item>salmon, sám<hi>o</hi>n
<item>saloon, salún
<item>salt, solt
<item>same, séim
<item>sanctify, sánctifai
<item>sanction, sán<hi>cho</hi>n
<item>sanctity, sántiti
<item>sane, séin
<item>sardine, sárdin
<item>satisfy, satisfái
<item>saturday, sát<hi>o</hi>rdei
<item>sauce, sos
<item>saucer, sóser
<item>savor, séivor
<item>saw, so
<item>say, séi
<item>scalade, scaléid
<item>scale, skéil
<item>scene, sin
<item>scent, sent
<item>scholar, skólar
<item>school, skúl
<item>scissors, sísors
<item>scourer, scáurer
<pb n=421 id=pb421><item>scout, scáut
<item>scream, scrím
<item><corr sic=screan>screen</corr>, scrín
<item>screw, scriú
<item>scull, sc<hi>o</hi>l
<item>scullion, sc<hi>ó</hi>lion
<item>scuttle, sk<hi>o</hi>tel
<item>sea, si
<item>seal, sil
<item>seam, sim
<item>seamstress, símstres
<item>search, serch
<item>season, síson
<item>seat, sit
<item>second, séc<hi>o</hi>nd
<item>security, sekiúriti
<item>see, si
<item>seek, sik
<item>seem, sim
<item>seen, sin
<item>seize, sis
<item>sell, sel
<item>sense, sens
<item>sentence, séntens
<item>serge, ser<hi>ch</hi>
<item>sergeant, séryent
<item>sermon, s<hi>é</hi>rmon
<item>serve, s<hi>e</hi>rv
<item>service, s<hi>é</hi>rvis
<item>settle, sétel
<item>seventeen, séventin
<item>severe, sevíer
<item>sew, sóu
<item>shade, <hi>ch</hi>éid
<item>shake, <hi>ch</hi>éik
<item>shall, <hi>ch</hi>al
<item>shame, <hi>ch</hi>éim
<item>shape, <hi>ch</hi>éip
<item>share, <hi>ch</hi>éar
<item>sharpen, <hi>ch</hi>arpn
<item>shave, <hi>ch</hi>éiv
<item>shawl, <hi>ch</hi>ol
<item>she, <hi>ch</hi>i
<item>sheep, <hi>ch</hi>ip
<item>sheet, <hi>ch</hi>it
<item>shell, <hi>ch</hi>el
<item>sherry, <hi>ch</hi>éri
<item>shine, <hi>ch</hi>áin
<item>ship, <hi>ch</hi>ip
<item>shipwreck, <hi>ch</hi>íprek
<item>shoe, <hi>ch</hi>u
<item>shoemaker, <hi>ch</hi>úmek<hi>e</hi>r
<item>shoot, <hi>ch</hi>ut
<item>shore, <hi>ch</hi>óur
<item>short, <hi>ch</hi>ort
<item>should, <hi>ch</hi>ud
<item>shoulder, <hi>ch</hi>óuld<hi>e</hi>r
<item>show, <hi>ch</hi>óu
<item>shrine, <hi>ch</hi>ráin
<item>shut, <hi>ch</hi>ot
<item>shutters, <hi>ch</hi>óters
<item>shy, <hi>ch</hi>ai
<pb n=422 id=pb422><item>side, sáid
<item>siege, si<hi>ch</hi>
<item>sieve, siv
<item>sight, sáit
<item>sign, sáin
<item>signal, sígnal
<item>signature, síñachur
<item>signs, sáins
<item>silence, sáilens
<item>silent, sáilent
<item>simple, símpel
<item>sincere, sinsíer
<item>sing, sin
<item><corr sic=singeer>singer</corr>, sín-<hi>e</hi>r
<item>single, sínguel
<item>singular, sínguiular
<item>sir, s<hi>e</hi>r
<item>sirloin, s<hi>e</hi>rloin
<item>sister, síst<hi>e</hi>r
<item>situation, situé<hi>che</hi>n
<item>size, sáis
<item>skate, skéit
<item>skill, skil
<item>skimmer, skímer
<item>skirt, sk<hi>e</hi>rt
<item>skull, sk<hi>o</hi>l
<item>sky, scái
<item>slate, sléit
<item>sleep, slip
<item>sleepy, slípi
<item>sleeve, sliv
<item>sleigh, sléi
<item>slept, slept
<item>slice, sláis
<item>slide, <corr sic=slaid>sláid</corr>
<item>slight, sláit
<item>slipper, slip<hi>e</hi>r
<item>sloop, slup
<item>slow, slóu
<item>small, smol
<item>smell, smel
<item>smile, smáil
<item>smith, smiz
<item>smoke, smóuk
<item>snail, snéil
<item>snake, snéik
<item>snore, snóur
<item>snout, snáut
<item>snow, snóu
<item>snuffers, sn<hi>ó</hi>fers
<item>so, sóu
<item>soap, sóup
<item>sock, sok
<item>sofa, sóufa
<item>soft, soft
<item>soldier, sóldyer
<item>sole, sóul
<item>some, s<hi>o</hi>m
<item>somebody, s<hi>ó</hi>mbodi
<item>someone, s<hi>ó</hi>muon
<item>something, s<hi>ó</hi>mzin
<item>sometimes, s<hi>ó</hi>mtaims
<pb n=423 id=pb423><item>somewhat, s<hi>ó</hi>mjuot
<item>somewhere, s<hi>ó</hi>mju<hi>e</hi>r
<item>son, s<hi>o</hi>n
<item>soon, sun
<item>sore, sóur
<item>sorrel, sórel
<item>sorrow, sórou
<item>sorry, sóri
<item>sound, sáund
<item>soup, sup
<item>sour, sáu<hi>e</hi>r
<item>sow, sáu
<item>space, spéis
<item>spacious, spé<hi>cho</hi>s
<item>spade, spéid
<item>spanish, spáni<hi>ch</hi>
<item>spare, spéar
<item>sparrow, spárou
<item>speak, spik
<item>spectacles, spéctakels
<item>speculate, spékiuleit
<item>spell, spel
<item>spices, spáises
<item>spider, spáider
<item>spill, spil
<item><corr sic=spinage>spinach</corr>, spína<hi>ch</hi>
<item>spleen, splín
<item>spoke, spóuk
<item>sponge, sp<hi>o</hi>n<hi>ch</hi>
<item>spool, spul
<item>spoon, spun
<item>sprain, spréin
<item>spread, spred
<item>spun, sp<hi>o</hi>n
<item>spur, sp<hi>o</hi>r
<item>squadron, skuódron
<item>square, scué<hi>a</hi>r
<item>squirrel, scuírel
<item>stable, stéibel
<item>staff, staf
<item>stage, stéi<hi>ch</hi>
<item>stain, stéin
<item>stair, stéar
<item>staircase, stearkéis
<item>stalk, stók
<item>stallion, stáll<hi>o</hi>n
<item>stalls, stols
<item>stamp, stamp
<item>starboard, stárbord
<item>starling, stárlin
<item>state, stéit
<item>stationer, sté<hi>ch</hi>oner
<item>stationery, sté<hi>ch</hi>oneri
<item>statue, státiu
<item>stay, stéi
<item>steady, stédi
<item>steak, sték
<item>steal, stil
<item>steam, stim
<item>steamer, stím<hi>e</hi>r
<item>steed, stid
<item>steel, stil
<pb n=424 id=pb424><item>step, step
<item>stew, stiú
<item>steward, stíuard
<item>stitch, stich
<item>stick, stik
<item>still, stil
<item>stirrup, stír<hi>o</hi>p
<item>stock, stok
<item>stockings, stókins
<item>stole, stóul
<item>stomach, stómak
<item>stone, stóun
<item>stool, stul
<item>store, stóur
<item>stove, stóuv
<item>story, stóri
<item>straight, stréit
<item>stranger, strényer
<item>street, strit
<item><corr sic=strangh>strange</corr>, stran<hi>ch</hi>
<item>strike, stráik
<item>string, strin
<item>strong, stron
<item>struck, str<hi>o</hi>k
<item>study, st<hi>é</hi>di
<item>stuff, st<hi>o</hi>f
<item>stupidity, stiupíditi
<item>sty, stái
<item>subject, s<hi>ó</hi>byect
<item>subscriber, s<hi>ó</hi>bscráiber
<item>suburb, s<hi>ó</hi>b<hi>o</hi>rb
<item>such, s<hi>e</hi>ch
<item>sucking-pig, s<hi>ó</hi>kin-pig
<item>sudden, s<hi>ó</hi>den
<item>sue, siú
<item>suffer, s<hi>o</hi>fer
<item>sufficient, s<hi>o</hi>fíchent
<item>sugar, <hi>ch</hi>úgar
<item>suit, siut
<item>sum, s<hi>o</hi>m
<item>sun, s<hi>o</hi>n
<item>sunday, s<hi>ó</hi>ndei
<item>sunrise, s<hi>o</hi>nráis
<item>sunset, s<hi>o</hi>nsét
<item>sup, s<hi>o</hi>p
<item>supper, s<hi>ó</hi>per
<item>supplies, s<hi>o</hi>pláis
<item>support, s<hi>o</hi>port
<item>suppose, s<hi>o</hi>póus
<item>sure, <hi>ch</hi>uer
<item>surplice, s<hi>ó</hi>rplis
<item>surprise, s<hi>o</hi>rpráis
<item>surrender, s<hi>o</hi>rénder
<item>suspicious, s<hi>o</hi>spí<hi>cho</hi>s
<item>suspension, s<hi>o</hi>spén<hi>che</hi>n
<item>swallow, suálo
<item>swan, suón
<item>swear, suéar
<item>sweat, súet
<item>sweep, súip
<item>sweet, suít
<item>sweetmeats, suitmíts
<pb n=425 id=pb425><item>swell, suél
<item>swim, suím
<item>swoon, suun
<item>sword, sóurd
<item>sympathize, simpazáis



<item>Table, téibel
<item>tail, téil
<item>tailor, téilor
<item>take, téik
<item>talk, tok
<item>tame, téim
<item>tape, téip
<item>tare, téir
<item>task, task
<item>taste, téist
<item>tea, ti
<item>teach, tich
<item>teacher, tích<hi>e</hi>r
<item>teeth, tiz<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>telegraph, télegraf
<item>tell, tel
<item>temple, témpel
<item>terror, tér<hi>o</hi>r
<item>than, <hi>d</hi>an
<item>thank, zank
<item>that, <hi>d</hi>at
<item>the, <hi>d</hi>i
<item>theatre, zíeiter
<item>their, <hi>d</hi>ear
<item>them, <hi>d</hi>em
<item>then, <hi>d</hi>en
<item>there, <hi>d</hi>ear
<item>therefore, <hi>d</hi>earfór
<item>thermometer, zermómeter
<item>they, <hi>d</hi>éi
<item>thick, zik
<item>thief, <hi>d</hi>if
<item>thigh, <hi>d</hi>ái
<item>thimble, zímbel
<item>thin, zin
<item>thing, zin
<item>think, zink
<item>third, z<hi>e</hi>rd
<item>thirst, z<hi>e</hi>rst
<item>thirteen, z<hi>é</hi>rtin
<item>this, <hi>d</hi>is
<item>thorn, zorn
<item>thoroughly, zórouli
<item>those, <hi>d</hi>óus
<item>thou, <hi>d</hi>au
<item>though, d<hi>ó</hi>u
<item>thousand, záusand
<item>thread, zred
<item>three, zri
<item>thrive, zráiv
<item>throat, zróut
<item>through, zru
<item>thunder, z<hi>ó</hi>nd<hi>e</hi>r
<item>thursday, z<hi>ó</hi>rsdei
<item>thus, <hi>do</hi>s
<item>ticket, tíket
<pb n=426 id=pb426><item>tide, táid
<item>tie, tái
<item>tiger, táiguer
<item>tight, tait<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>till, til<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>time, táim
<item>tired, táierd
<item>tiresome, táiers<hi>o</hi>m
<item>titles, táitles
<item>to, tu
<item>toad, tóud
<item>to-day, tu-déi
<item>toe, tóu
<item>together, togué<hi>de</hi>r
<item>told, tóuld
<item>tomato, tométo
<item>to-morrow, tu-móro
<item>tongue, t<hi>o</hi>ng
<item>to-night, tu-náit
<item>too, tu
<item>tooth, tuz
<item>toothache, tuzéik
<item>topsail, topséil
<item>tortoise, tórtis
<item>toward, tóuar
<item>towel, táuel
<item>town, táun
<item>toy, tói
<item>trade, tréid
<item>train, tréin
<item>trample, trámpel
<item><corr sic="tramp-way, trámp-wei">tram-way, trám-wei</corr>
<item>trance, trans
<item>tranquil, tráncuil
<item>tranquillize, tráncuilais
<item>transaction, transác<hi>che</hi>n
<item>transcend, transénd
<item>transcribe, transcráib
<item>transfer, transf<hi>ó</hi>r
<item>transition, transí<hi>che</hi>n
<item>translate, transléit
<item>transpire, transpáier
<item>trapeze, trapís
<item>trawl, trol
<item>tray, tréi
<item>tread, tred
<item>treason, trisn
<item>treasure, tré<hi>ch</hi>ur
<item>treasurer, tré<hi>ch</hi>ur<hi>o</hi>r
<item>treasury, tré<hi>ch</hi>uri
<item>treat, trit
<item>treaty, tríti
<item>treble, trébel
<item>tree, tri
<item>trial, tráial
<item>tribe, tráib
<item>tribune, tríbiun
<item>tribute, tríbiut
<item>trice, tráis
<item>trifle, tráifel
<item>trio, tráio
<item>tripe, tráip
<pb n=427 id=pb427><item>triumph, tráiunf
<item>troop, trup
<item>trophy, trófi
<item>trouble, tr<hi>ó</hi>bel
<item>trousers, tráusers
<item>true, tru
<item>truly, trúli
<item>trunk, tr<hi>e</hi>nk
<item>trust, tr<hi>e</hi>st
<item>truth, truz
<item>try, trái
<item>tub, t<hi>e</hi>b
<item>tube, tiúb
<item>tuesday, tiúsdei
<item>tumor, tiúm<hi>é</hi>r
<item>tune, tiún
<item>tunny, t<hi>ó</hi>nni
<item>tureen, tiurín
<item>turkey, t<hi>é</hi>rki
<item>turn, t<hi>e</hi>rn
<item>turtle, t<hi>é</hi>rtel
<item>tutor, tiút<hi>o</hi>r
<item>twelve, tuélv
<item>twenty, <corr sic="tvénti">tuénti</corr>
<item>twice, tuáis
<item>twilight, tuáilait
<item>twin, tuín
<item>two, tu
<item>type, táip
<item>tyrant, táirant
<item>tyro, táiro



<item>Ugly, <hi>é</hi>gli
<item>umbrella, <hi>e</hi>mbréla
<item>unable, <hi>e</hi>néibel
<item>unaware, <hi>e</hi>neuéier
<item>unbelief, <hi>e</hi>nbelíf
<item>uncivil, <hi>e</hi>nsívil
<item>uncle, <hi>é</hi>nkel
<item>unclose, <hi>e</hi>nclóus
<item>uncork, <hi>e</hi>ncórk
<item>unction, <hi>é</hi>n<hi>ch</hi>on
<item>under, <hi>é</hi>nd<hi>e</hi>r
<item>undertake, <hi>e</hi>nd<hi>e</hi>rtéik
<item>underwood, <hi>é</hi>nd<hi>e</hi>ruud
<item>undress, <hi>e</hi>ndrés
<item>undue, <hi>e</hi>ndíu
<item>uneasy, <hi>e</hi>nísi
<item><corr sic=unequial>unequal</corr>, <hi>e</hi>nícuol
<item>unfair, <hi>e</hi>nféir
<item>unfed, <hi>e</hi>nféd
<item>unfit, <hi>e</hi>nfít
<item>unfortunate, <hi>e</hi>nfórchiuneit
<item>ungrateful, <hi>e</hi>ngréitful
<item>unhappy, <hi>e</hi>njépi
<item>unit, iúnit
<item>unite, iunáit
<item>unity, iúniti
<item>unjust, <hi>e</hi>ny<hi>e</hi>st
<item>unkind, <hi>e</hi>nkáind
<item>unknown, <hi>e</hi>nnóun
<item>unless, <hi>e</hi>nlés
<pb n=428 id=pb428><item>unlike, <hi>e</hi>nláik
<item>unmarried, <hi>e</hi>nmárid
<item>unprovided, <hi>e</hi>nprováided
<item>unquiet, <hi>e</hi>ncuáiet
<item>unripe, <hi>e</hi>nráip
<item>unseat, <hi>e</hi>nsít
<item>unsettle, <hi>e</hi>nsétel
<item>unsociable, <hi>e</hi>nsó<hi>ch</hi>abel
<item>unsound, <hi>e</hi>nsáund
<item>untie, <hi>e</hi>ntái
<item>until, <hi>e</hi>ntíl
<item>untrue, <hi>e</hi>ntrú
<item>unwell, <hi>e</hi>nuél
<item>up, <hi>e</hi>p
<item>upon, <hi>e</hi>pón
<item>urgent, <hi>ó</hi>ryent
<item>us, <hi>e</hi>s
<item>use, iús
<item>useful, iúsful
<item>useless, iúsles
<item>usual, iú<hi>ch</hi>ual
<item>utilize, iútilais



<item>Vacant, véicant
<item>vacation, vakéi<hi>ch</hi>on
<item>vaccinate, vásineit
<item>vacillate, vásileit
<item>vain, véin
<item>vale, veil
<item>valiant, vályant
<item>valley, váli
<item>valuable, váliuabel
<item>value, váliu
<item>vane, véin
<item>vanity, vániti
<item>variable, véiriabel
<item>variation, veriéi<hi>ch</hi>on
<item>variety, varáieti
<item>vase, véis
<item>vault, volt
<item>veal, vil
<item>vegetable, véyetabel
<item>vehicle, víikel
<item>veil, véil
<item>vein, véin
<item>venerate, vénereit
<item>venial, vínial
<item>ventilate, véntileit
<item>venture, vén<hi>ch</hi>ur
<item>verify, vérifai
<item>vermicelly, v<hi>e</hi>rmi<hi>ch</hi>éli
<item>vertigo, v<hi>e</hi>rtáigo
<item>vesture, véschiur
<item>viaduct, váiad<hi>o</hi>ct
<item>viand, váiand
<item>vicar, vik<hi>e</hi>r
<item>vice, váis
<item>vicious, ví<hi>cho</hi>s
<item>view, viú
<item>vile, váil
<item>violet, váiolet
<item>violin, váiolin
<item>violoncello, violonchélo
<pb n=429 id=pb429><item>virtue, v<hi>é</hi>rchiu
<item>vocabulary, vocábiulery
<item>voice, vóis
<item>volume, vólium
<item>vowel, váuel



<item>Wafer, uéifer
<item>wages, uéi<hi>ch</hi>s
<item>waist, uéist
<item>wait, uéit
<item>waiter, uéit<hi>e</hi>r
<item>wake, uéik
<item>walk, uók
<item>walking, uókin
<item>wall, uól
<item>walnut, uóln<hi>o</hi>t
<item>want, uónt
<item>war, uór
<item>ware, uéar
<item>warm, uorm
<item>was, uós
<item>wash, uó<hi>ch</hi>
<item>wasp, uásp
<item>waste, uéist
<item>watch, uóch
<item>water, uót<hi>e</hi>r
<item>watering-place, uóterin-pleis
<item>wax, uáx
<item>way, uéi
<item>we, uí
<item>weak, uík
<item>wear, uéar
<item>weather, ué<hi>de</hi>r
<item>weave, uiv
<item>wednesday, uénsdei
<item>week, uik
<item>weep, uíp
<item>weigh, uéi
<item>weight, uéit
<item>welcome, uélc<hi>o</hi>me
<item>well, uél
<item>were, uér
<item>wet, uét
<item>wether, ue<hi>d</hi>er
<item>whale, juéil
<item><corr sic=wharp>wharf</corr>, juórf
<item>what, juót
<item>wheat, juít
<item>wheel, juíl
<item>when, juén<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>where, juéar
<item>whether, jué<hi>d</hi>er
<item>which, juich
<item>while, juáil
<item>whip, juíp
<item>whisky, juíski
<item>whisper, juísp<hi>e</hi>r
<item>whistle, juísel
<item>white, juáit
<item>who, ju
<item>whole, jóul<corr sic=","></corr>
<item>wholesale, jóulseil
<pb n=430 id=pb430><item>whom, jum
<item>why, juái
<item>wick, uík
<item>wicked, uíked
<item>wide, uáid
<item>widow, uídou
<item>widower, uídou<hi>e</hi>r
<item>wife, uáif
<item>wig, uíg
<item>wild, uáild
<item>wilful, uílful
<item>will, uíl
<item>win, uín
<item>wind, uínd
<item>wind-mill, uínd-mil
<item>window, uíndou
<item>wine, uáin
<item>wing, uíng
<item>wink, uínk
<item>wire, uáir
<item>wise, uáis
<item>wish, uí<hi>ch</hi>
<item>wit, uit
<item>witch, uítch
<item>with, uíz
<item>within, uízin
<item>without, uizáut
<item>withy, uizi
<item>witness, uítnes
<item>woe, uó
<item>wolf, uulf
<item>woman, <corr sic="úman">uúman</corr>
<item>women, uímen
<item>wonder, uónder
<item>woo, uu
<item>wood, uúd
<item>wool, uúl
<item>woolen, uulen
<item>word, uórd
<item><corr sic=woordy>wordy</corr>, uordi
<item>work, u<hi>o</hi>rk
<item>world, u<hi>ó</hi>rld
<item>worm, u<hi>ó</hi>rm
<item>worst, u<hi>ó</hi>rst
<item>worth, u<hi>ó</hi>rz
<item>worthy, u<hi>ó</hi>rzi
<item>wound, uúnd
<item>wove, uóuv
<item>wrath, roz
<item>wreath, riz
<item>wreck, rek
<item>wrench, rench
<item>wrinkle, rínkel
<item>wrist, rist
<item>write, ráit
<item>writing, ráitin
<item>wrong, rong



<item>Yawn, yon
<item>ye, yi
<item>year, yí<hi>e</hi>r
<item>yellow, yélou
<item>yes, yes
<pb n=431 id=pb431><item>yesterday, yésterdei
<item>yet, yet
<item>yield, yild
<item>you, yu
<item>young, y<hi>o</hi>ng
<item>your, yú<hi>e</hi>r
<item>youth, yúz


<item>Zeal, sil
<item>zinc, sinc
<item>zoology, sóoloyi
</list>




<pb n=433 id=pb433>
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 id=toc type=Contents>
<head>INDICE</head>


<list>
<item>                                                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>Pág.</ab>
<item><ref target=pahamtngon>Pahamatn&gtilde;on</ref>                                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>3</ab>
<item><ref target=alfabeto>Alfabeto n&gtilde;a iningles</ref>                                                          <ab type=tocPageNum>5</ab>
<item><ref target=s1>Ang tao; lain laing m&gtilde;a pagcabutang nia</ref>                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>11</ab>
<item><ref target=s2>Ang panimalay; ang pagcacaubanan</ref>                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>14</ab>
<item><ref target=s3>Ang calag; ang m&gtilde;a virtud ug ang m&gtilde;a vicio</ref>                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>16</ab>
<item><ref target=s4>Ang lauas sa tao; ang m&gtilde;a balatian</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>21</ab>
<item><ref target=s5>Lain laing m&gtilde;a butang n&gtilde;a nahatun&gtilde;ud sa lauas</ref>                           <ab type=tocPageNum>24</ab>
<item><ref target=s6>M&gtilde;a saquit</ref>                                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>26</ab>
<item><ref target=s7>M&gtilde;a tambal</ref>                                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>28</ab>
<item><ref target=s8>Ang ciudad</ref>                                                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>30</ab>
<item><ref target=s9>Ang singbahan</ref>                                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>32</ab>
<item><ref target=s10>Ang balay</ref>                                                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>34</ab>
<item><ref target=s11>Ang casangcapan con ang m&gtilde;a galamiton sa balay</ref>                                <ab type=tocPageNum>36</ab>
<item><ref target=s12>M&gtilde;a panapton n&gtilde;a nagcalain lain</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>38</ab>
<item><ref target=s13>M&gtilde;a visti</ref>                                                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>39</ab>
<item><ref target=s14>M&gtilde;a dayan dayan, m&gtilde;a hias, &amp;.</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>41</ab>
<item><ref target=s15>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa pagcaon ug sa paginom</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>42</ab>
<pb n=434 id=pb434><item><ref target=s16>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa cocina</ref>                                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>43</ab>
<item><ref target=s17>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa cuarto n&gtilde;a pagahigda-an</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>44</ab>
<item><ref target=s18>Ang panhunauan</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>45</ab>
<item><ref target=s19>Ang sulatan</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>46</ab>
<item><ref target=s20>Ang capandayan</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>47</ab>
<item><ref target=s21>M&gtilde;a galamiton sa mananalot</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>48</ab>
<item><ref target=s22>Capandayan sa magbobohat ug sapin</ref>                                                <ab type=tocPageNum>48</ab>
<item><ref target=s23>M&gtilde;a bahin sa horasan</ref>                                                          <ab type=tocPageNum>49</ab>
<item><ref target=s24>Guarniciones, silla, &amp;.</ref>                                                          <ab type=tocPageNum>49</ab>
<item><ref target=s25>M&gtilde;a armas, &amp;.</ref>                                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>50</ab>
<item><ref target=s26>Ang música</ref>                                                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>51</ab>
<item><ref target=s27>M&gtilde;a dula-an, m&gtilde;a calilin&gtilde;auan</ref>                                           <ab type=tocPageNum>53</ab>
<item><ref target=s28>Ang pagcaon</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>54</ab>
<item><ref target=s29>Ang paginom</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>57</ab>
<item><ref target=s30>Ang Religión</ref>                                                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>59</ab>
<item><ref target=s31>M&gtilde;a quinaadman, m&gtilde;a arte, &amp;.</ref>                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>62</ab>
<item><ref target=s32>M&gtilde;a guinharian, &amp;.</ref>                                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>65</ab>
<item><ref target=s33>M&gtilde;a ponoan ug m&gtilde;a magsisilve sa singbahan</ref>                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>67</ab>
<item><ref target=s34>M&gtilde;a ponoan ug lain pang m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a may catungdanan</ref>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>68</ab>
<item><ref target=s35>Lain laing m&gtilde;a tao n&gtilde;a may oficio con catungdanan</ref>                          <ab type=tocPageNum>69</ab>
<item><ref target=s36>Ubang m&gtilde;a n&gtilde;alan</ref>                                                           <ab type=tocPageNum>73</ab>
<item><ref target=s37>M&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a igtalahod</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>76</ab>
<item><ref target=s38>Ang firmamento</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>76</ab>
<item><ref target=s39>Ang yuta</ref>                                                                         <ab type=tocPageNum>78</ab>
<item><ref target=s40>Ang tubig</ref>                                                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>79</ab>
<item><ref target=s41>Ang tanaman</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>80</ab>
<item><ref target=s42>M&gtilde;a mananap</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>83</ab>
<pb n=435 id=pb435><item><ref target=s43>M&gtilde;a langgam</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>86</ab>
<item><ref target=s44>M&gtilde;a isda, &amp;.</ref>                                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>87</ab>
<item><ref target=s45>Tun&gtilde;ud sa m&gtilde;a mananap, &amp;.</ref>                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>88</ab>
<item><ref target=s46>M&gtilde;a sacayan</ref>                                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>90</ab>
<item><ref target=s47>Ang pagcomercio</ref>                                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>92</ab>
<item><ref target=s48>Ang pagisip</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>97</ab>
<item><ref target=s49>M&gtilde;a adlao, m&gtilde;a bulan, &amp;.</ref>                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>100</ab>
<item><ref target=s50>Ang salapi</ref>                                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>104</ab>
<item><ref target=s51>M&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a americano</ref>                                          <ab type=tocPageNum>107</ab>
<item><ref target=s52>M&gtilde;a tilimban&gtilde;an n&gtilde;a bisaya</ref>                                             <ab type=tocPageNum>108</ab>
<item><ref target=s53>M&gtilde;a tacsanan n&gtilde;a americano</ref>                                                <ab type=tocPageNum>108</ab>
<item><ref target=s54>M&gtilde;a tacsanan n&gtilde;a bisaya</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>109</ab>
<item><ref target=s55>M&gtilde;a solocdan</ref>                                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>109</ab>
<item><ref target=s56>Lain laing m&gtilde;a adjetivo</ref>                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>110</ab>
<item><ref target=s57>M&gtilde;a verbo</ref>                                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>114</ab>
<item><ref target=s58>M&gtilde;a panigin&gtilde;nan sa nagcalain laing m&gtilde;a tiempo sa verbo</ref>                 <ab type=tocPageNum>120</ab>
<item><ref target=s59>Ang verbo <hi>to have</hi></ref>                                                             <ab type=tocPageNum>139</ab>
<item><ref target=s60>Ang verbo <hi>to be</hi></ref>                                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>146</ab>
<item><ref target=s61>Lain laing m&gtilde;a pagpamulong</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>153</ab>
<item><ref target=s62>M&gtilde;a pagtocso sa pagsusi cun sa pagpan&gtilde;utana sa bisan onsa</ref>                 <ab type=tocPageNum>192</ab>
<item><ref target=s63><seg id=seg1>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud</seg> sa m&gtilde;a pinamulon&gtilde;an</ref>                                <ab type=tocPageNum>198</ab>
<item><ref target=s64><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a fecha, m&gtilde;a adlao, &amp;.</ref>                        <ab type=tocPageNum>202</ab>
<item><ref target=s65><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa tiempo</ref>                                                <ab type=tocPageNum>208</ab>
<item><ref target=s66><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a noticia</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>213</ab>
<item><ref target=s67><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa edad</ref>                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>216</ab>
<item><ref target=s68><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa pagpan&gtilde;utana tun&gtilde;ud sa usa ca tao</ref>                         <ab type=tocPageNum>219</ab>
<pb n=436 id=pb436><item><ref target=s69><seg copyOf=seg2>Paquigpulong</seg> sa pagpaquigsabut sa usa ca tao</ref>                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>222</ab>
<item><ref target=s70><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa pagcahigala</ref>                                           <ab type=tocPageNum>224</ab>
<item><ref target=s71><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa tao ug sa m&gtilde;a caubanan nia</ref>                         <ab type=tocPageNum>226</ab>
<item><ref target=s72><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa paghinagbo sa usa ca tao</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>232</ab>
<item><ref target=s73><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa Religión</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>237</ab>
<item><ref target=s74><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa balay</ref>                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>240</ab>
<item><ref target=s75><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa singbahan</ref>                                             <ab type=tocPageNum>244</ab>
<item><ref target=s76><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa escuelahan</ref>                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>246</ab>
<item><ref target=s77><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca ciudad</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>250</ab>
<item><ref target=s78><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa vacaciones</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>253</ab>
<item><ref target=s79><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa pagsodoy sodoy</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>255</ab>
<item><ref target=s80><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a cahuy, &amp;.</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>261</ab>
<item><ref target=s81><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa pagcaligo</ref>                                             <ab type=tocPageNum>267</ab>
<item><ref target=s82><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a quinahanglan sa tao</ref>                            <ab type=tocPageNum>270</ab>
<item><ref target=s83><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a saquit</ref>                                         <ab type=tocPageNum>272</ab>
<item><ref target=s84><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa masaquiton ug sa mananambal</ref>                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>278</ab>
<item><ref target=s85><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa pagduao</ref>                                                         <ab type=tocPageNum>280</ab>
<item><ref target=s86><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa pagadto sa higda-an</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>285</ab>
<item><ref target=s87><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa pagban&gtilde;on sa higda-an</ref>                              <ab type=tocPageNum>286</ab>
<item><ref target=s88><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa paglacao, pagviaje, &amp;.</ref>                                <ab type=tocPageNum>289</ab>
<item><ref target=s89><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa pagpanamilit</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>296</ab>
<item><ref target=s90><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa pagsulat</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>297</ab>
<item><ref target=s91><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa pagcaon, &amp;.</ref>                                           <ab type=tocPageNum>302</ab>
<item><ref target=s92><seg copyOf=seg1>,, ,,</seg> sa m&gtilde;a ilimnon</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>308</ab>
<pb n=437 id=pb437><item><ref target=s93><seg copyOf=seg1>Paquigpulong tun&gtilde;ud</seg> sa pagvisti</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>311</ab>
<item><ref target=s94><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa bata bata</ref>                                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>314</ab>
<item><ref target=s95><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca mananahi</ref>                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>318</ab>
<item><ref target=s96><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa magbabaliguia ug papel, &amp;.</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>320</ab>
<item><ref target=s97><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a mueble</ref>                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>322</ab>
<item><ref target=s98><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa <corr sic=magbaliliguia>magbabaliguia</corr> sa m&gtilde;a sinina, &amp;.</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>325</ab>
<item><ref target=s99><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a hias</ref>                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>329</ab>
<item><ref target=s100><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa magbabaliguia sa m&gtilde;a libro</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>330</ab>
<item><ref target=s101><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca tienda</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>333</ab>
<item><ref target=s102><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca fonda</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>335</ab>
<item><ref target=s103><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca hotel</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>338</ab>
<item><ref target=s104><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa usa ca Banco</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>340</ab>
<item><ref target=s105><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa pagabang sa usa ca sologo-on</ref>                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>343</ab>
<item><ref target=s106><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> sa pagabang sa usa ca carruage</ref>                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>345</ab>
<item><ref target=s107><seg copyOf=seg2>,,</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa pagpatigayon, pagpalit, &amp;.</ref>                            <ab type=tocPageNum>347</ab>
<item><ref target=s108>Lain laing m&gtilde;a sugo sa pagpalit, pagbaliguia, &amp;.</ref>                             <ab type=tocPageNum>353</ab>
<item><ref target=s109><seg id=seg2>Paquigpulong</seg> tun&gtilde;ud sa pagisip sa salapi</ref>                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>356</ab>
<item><ref target=s110><seg id=seg3>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong</seg> sa caligutgut, &amp;.</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>361</ab>
<item><ref target=s111><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa pagpamatuod, sa paglimod, &amp;.</ref>                              <ab type=tocPageNum>362</ab>
<item><ref target=s112><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa paghitin&gtilde;ala</ref>                                           <ab type=tocPageNum>366</ab>
<item><ref target=s113><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa calooy, &amp;.</ref>                                                <ab type=tocPageNum>368</ab>
<item><ref target=s114><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa pagpan&gtilde;ayo ug sa pagtamod</ref>                              <ab type=tocPageNum>369</ab>
<pb n=438 id=pb438><item><ref target=s115><seg copyOf=seg3>M&gtilde;a pagpamulong</seg> sa paghigugma, &amp;.</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>371</ab>
<item><ref target=s116><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa calipay, &amp;.</ref>                                                <ab type=tocPageNum>372</ab>
<item><ref target=s117><seg copyOf=seg3>,, ,,</seg> sa cahadluc, &amp;.</ref>                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>374</ab>
<item><ref target=s118>M&gtilde;a panigingnan sa m&gtilde;a sulat, &amp;.</ref>                                          <ab type=tocPageNum>375</ab>
<item><ref target=vocabulario>Vocabulario n&gtilde;a diotay sa pagcasangpot sa m&gtilde;a pulong n&gtilde;a iningles</ref>      <ab type=tocPageNum>391</ab>
</list>




<pb n=439 id=pb439>
<div1 id=sayop type=Errata>
<head>M&gtilde;a sayop.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell lang=en>Pág.   <cell>Lin.     <cell><hi>Guisulat</hi>       <cell><hi>Basaha</hi>

<row><cell lang=en><seg id=seg4>24</seg>     <cell>2        <cell>bucoc                   <cell>bucog
<row><cell lang=en><seg copyOf=seg4>,,</seg>      <cell>26       <cell>Laing laing             <cell>Lain laing
<row><cell lang=en>31     <cell>20&ndash;1     <cell>colong                  <cell>colon
<row><cell lang=en><seg id=seg5>32</seg>     <cell>18       <cell>Jewerly                 <cell>Jewelry
<row><cell lang=en><seg copyOf=seg5>,,</seg>      <cell>27       <cell>lun&gtilde;anan             <cell>lubn&gtilde;anan
<row><cell lang=en><seg id=seg6>37</seg>     <cell>5        <cell>humaca                  <cell>hamaca
<row><cell lang=en><seg copyOf=seg6>,,</seg>      <cell>29       <cell>Coffe-mill              <cell>Coffee-mill
<row><cell lang=en>47     <cell>15       <cell>Wrenck                  <cell>Wrench
<row><cell lang=en>61     <cell>14       <cell>Christ                  <cell>Christi
<row><cell lang=en>63     <cell>1        <cell>Ceometry                <cell>Geometry
<row><cell lang=en><seg id=seg7>78</seg>     <cell>11       <cell>Dreeze                  <cell>Breeze
<row><cell lang=en><seg copyOf=seg7>,,</seg>      <cell>12       <cell>Langdum                 <cell>Landung
<row><cell lang=en>79     <cell>4        <cell>Walley                  <cell>Valley
<row><cell lang=en>82     <cell>13&ndash;4     <cell>Cutton                  <cell>Cotton
<row><cell lang=en>89     <cell>9        <cell>Pagcaagomot             <cell>Pagcaagomod
<row><cell lang=en>99     <cell>11       <cell>twentieth-first         <cell>twenty-first
<row><cell lang=en>115    <cell>2        <cell>lay                     <cell>lie
<row><cell lang=en>128    <cell>5        <cell>extinguished            <cell>extinguish
<row><cell lang=en>136    <cell>12       <cell>macasala                <cell>macasasala
<row><cell lang=en>152    <cell>19       <cell>Tigayad                 <cell>Tigpasagad
<row><cell lang=en>162    <cell>9        <cell>cay                     <cell>ca
<row><cell lang=en>165    <cell>11       <cell>What do you will?       <cell>What will you?
</table>



</div1>


<divGen type=Colophon>


<div1 id=engtoc type=Contents>
<head>English Table of Contents</head>


<list>
<item><ref target=pahamtngon>Notice</ref>
<item><ref target=alfabeto>The English Alphabet</ref>

<item><ref target=s1>The Man; his various States</ref>
<item><ref target=s2>The Family, Relationships</ref>
<item><ref target=s3>The Soul, Virtues and Vices</ref>
<item><ref target=s4>The Human Body; the Senses</ref>
<item><ref target=s5>Various Things Related to the Body</ref>
<item><ref target=s6>Diseases</ref>
<item><ref target=s7>Medicines</ref>
<item><ref target=s8>The City</ref>
<item><ref target=s9>The Church</ref>
<item><ref target=s10>The House</ref>
<item><ref target=s11>Items for and Furniture in the House</ref>
<item><ref target=s12>Various Cloths</ref>
<item><ref target=s13>Clothes</ref>
<item><ref target=s14>Decorations and Jewelry</ref>
<item><ref target=s15>Items for Eating and Drinking</ref>
<item><ref target=s16>Items for the Kitchen</ref>
<item><ref target=s17>Items for the Bed-room</ref>
<item><ref target=s18>The Toilet</ref>
<item><ref target=s19>The Desk</ref>
<item><ref target=s20>Tools</ref>
<item><ref target=s21>Barber&apos;s Equipment</ref>
<item><ref target=s22>Hatter&apos;s and Shoemaker&apos;s Tools</ref>
<item><ref target=s23>The Parts of a Clock</ref>
<item><ref target=s24>Harness, Saddle, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s25>Weapons, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s26>Music</ref>
<item><ref target=s27>Toys and Entertainment</ref>
<item><ref target=s28>Food</ref>
<item><ref target=s29>Drinks</ref>
<item><ref target=s30>Religion</ref>
<item><ref target=s31>Sciences and Arts</ref>
<item><ref target=s32>Kingdoms, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s33>The Authorities and Servants of the Church</ref>
<item><ref target=s34>The Authorities and various other People with Duties</ref>
<item><ref target=s35>Various People and their Employments</ref>
<item><ref target=s36>Some Names</ref>
<item><ref target=s37>Personal Titles</ref>
<item><ref target=s38>The Sky</ref>
<item><ref target=s39>The Earth</ref>
<item><ref target=s40>The Water</ref>
<item><ref target=s41>The Plantation</ref>
<item><ref target=s42>Animals</ref>
<item><ref target=s43>Birds</ref>
<item><ref target=s44>Fishes, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s45>Acts of Animals, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s46>Ships</ref>
<item><ref target=s47>Trade</ref>
<item><ref target=s48>Numbers</ref>
<item><ref target=s49>Days, Months, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s50>Money</ref>
<item><ref target=s51>American Weights</ref>
<item><ref target=s52>Bisayan Weights</ref>
<item><ref target=s53>American Volumes</ref>
<item><ref target=s54>Bisayan Volumes</ref>
<item><ref target=s55>Units</ref>
<item><ref target=s56>Various Adjectives</ref>
<item><ref target=s57>Verbs</ref>
<item><ref target=s58>Examples of the various times of verbs</ref>
<item><ref target=s59>The verb To Have</ref>
<item><ref target=s60>The verb To Be</ref>
<item><ref target=s61>Various Expressions</ref>
<item><ref target=s62>Questions to Inquire about Things</ref>
<item><ref target=s63>Phrases about Languages</ref>
<item><ref target=s64>Phrases about Dates, Days, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s65>Phrases about the Weather</ref>
<item><ref target=s66>Phrases about the News</ref>
<item><ref target=s67>Phrases about Age</ref>
<item><ref target=s68>Phrases to inquire about somebody</ref>
<item><ref target=s69>Phrases to come to an agreement with somebody</ref>
<item><ref target=s70>Phrases about friendship</ref>
<item><ref target=s71>Phrases about man and his relationships</ref>
<item><ref target=s72>Phrases to greet somebody</ref>
<item><ref target=s73>Phrases about religion</ref>
<item><ref target=s74>Phrases for at home</ref>
<item><ref target=s75>Phrases for at the church</ref>
<item><ref target=s76>Phrases for at school</ref>
<item><ref target=s77>Phrases for in a town</ref>
<item><ref target=s78>Phrases about the holidays</ref>
<item><ref target=s79>Phrases about strolling around</ref>
<item><ref target=s80>Phrases about the trees, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s81>Phrases about taking a bath</ref>
<item><ref target=s82>Phrases about the necessities of man</ref>
<item><ref target=s83>Phrases about diseases</ref>
<item><ref target=s84>Phrases for patients and doctors</ref>
<item><ref target=s85>Phrases for visiting</ref>
<item><ref target=s86>Phrases about going to bed</ref>
<item><ref target=s87>Phrases about getting up</ref>
<item><ref target=s88>Phrases about leaving, travelling, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s89>Phrases for farewell</ref>
<item><ref target=s90>Phrases about writing</ref>
<item><ref target=s91>Phrases about eating, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s92>Phrases about drinking</ref>
<item><ref target=s93>Phrases about clothes</ref>
<item><ref target=s94>Phrases for assistants</ref>
<item><ref target=s95>Phrases for a tailor</ref>
<item><ref target=s96>Phrases for stationery shops, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s97>Phrases for furniture shops, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s98>Phrases for clothing stores, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s99>Phrases for jewellery shops, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s100>Phrases for bookshops, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s101>Phrases for a shop</ref>
<item><ref target=s102>Phrases for a restaurant</ref>
<item><ref target=s103>Phrases for a hotel</ref>
<item><ref target=s104>Phrases for a bank</ref>
<item><ref target=s105>Phrases to hire a servant</ref>
<item><ref target=s106>Phrases to hire a carriage</ref>
<item><ref target=s107>Phrases about bussiness, buying, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s108>Various orders for buying, selling, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s109>Phrases about counting money</ref>
<item><ref target=s110>Expressions of anger, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s111>Expressions of confirm, to deny, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s112>Expressions of possibility</ref>
<item><ref target=s113>Expressions of compassion, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s114>Expressions to ask and thank</ref>
<item><ref target=s115>Expressions of love, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s116>Expressions of happiness, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s117>Expressions of fear, etc.</ref>
<item><ref target=s118>Examples of letters, etc.</ref>

<item><ref target=vocabulario>Small Vocabulary for the pronunciation of English words</ref>
<item><ref target=sayop>Errata</ref>
</list>



</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[ ] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (https://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (https://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (https://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (https://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend="indent(2)"

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[ ] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.  ([0-9])\&ndash;([0-9])/([0-9]) becomes \1\&frac\2\3;
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
